Burlesque of some lines of Lopez de Vega
Translation of some lines at the end of Baretti's Easy Phraseology
Improviso translation of a distich on the duke of Modena's running away
Improviso translation of some lines of M. Benserade a son Lit
Epitaph for Mr. Hogarth
Translation of some lines, written under a print representing persons
skating
Impromptu translation of the same
To Mrs. Thrale, on her completing her thirty-fifth year
Impromptu translation of an air in the Clemenza di Tito of Metastasio
Translation of a speech of Aquileio in the Adriano of Metastasio
Burlesque of the modern versifications of ancient legendary tales
Friendship; an ode
On seeing a bust of Mrs. Montague
Improviso on a young heir's coming of age
Epitaphs--on his father
--his wife
--Mrs. Bell
--Mrs. Salusbury
--Dr. Goldsmith
--Mr. Thrale
Prefatory observations to the history of Rasselas
Rasselas, prince of Abissinia
When the works of a great writer, who has bequeathed to posterity a
lasting legacy, are presented to the world, it is naturally expected
that some account of his life should accompany the edition. The reader
wishes to know as much as possible of the author. The circumstances that
attended him, the features of his private character, his conversation,
and the means by which he arose to eminence, become the favourite
objects of inquiry. Curiosity is excited; and the admirer of his works
is eager to know his private opinions, his course of study, the
particularities of his conduct, and, above all, whether he pursued the
wisdom which he recommends, and practised the virtue which his writings
inspire. A principle of gratitude is awakened in every generous mind.
For the entertainment and instruction which genius and diligence have
provided for the world, men of refined and sensible tempers are ready to
pay their tribute of praise, and even to form a posthumous friendship
with the author.
In reviewing the life of such a writer, there is, besides, a rule of
justice to which the public have an undoubted claim. Fond admiration and
partial friendship should not be suffered to represent his virtues with
exaggeration; nor should malignity be allowed, under a specious
disguise, to magnify mere defects, the usual failings of human nature,
into vice or gross deformity. The lights and shades of the character
should be given; and if this be done with a strict regard to truth, a
just estimate of Dr. Johnson will afford a lesson, perhaps, as valuable
as the moral doctrine that speaks with energy in every page of his
works.
The present writer enjoyed the conversation and friendship of that
excellent man more than thirty years. He thought it an honour to be so
connected, and to this hour he reflects on his loss with regret; but
regret, he knows, has secret bribes, by which the judgment may be
influenced, and partial affection may be carried beyond the bounds of
truth. In the present case, however, nothing needs to be disguised, and
exaggerated praise is unnecessary. It is an observation of the younger
Pliny, in his epistle to his friend Tacitus, that history ought never to
magnify matters of fact, because worthy actions require nothing but the
truth: "nam nec historia debet egredi veritatem, et honeste factis
veritas sufficit." This rule, the present biographer promises, shall
guide his pen throughout the following narrative.
It may be said, the death of Dr. Johnson kept the public mind in
agitation beyond all former example. No literary character ever excited
so much attention; and, when the press has teemed with anecdotes,
apophthegms, essays, and publications of every kind, what occasion now
for a new tract on the same thread-bare subject? The plain truth shall
be the answer. The proprietors of Johnson's works thought the life,
which they prefixed to their former edition, too unwieldy for
republication. The prodigious variety of foreign matter, introduced into
that performance, seemed to overload the memory of Dr. Johnson, and, in
the account of his own life, to leave him hardly visible. They wished to
have a more concise, and, for that reason, perhaps, a more satisfactory
account, such as may exhibit a just picture of the man, and keep him the
principal figure in the foreground of his own picture. To comply with
that request is the design of this essay, which the writer undertakes
with a trembling hand. He has no discoveries, no secret anecdotes, no
occasional controversy, no sudden flashes of wit and humour, no private
conversation, and no new facts, to embellish his work. Every thing has
been gleaned. Dr. Johnson said of himself, "I am not uncandid, nor
severe: I sometimes say more than I mean, in jest, and people are apt to
by every man in society, has not been allowed to him. His fame has given
importance even to trifles; and the zeal of his friends has brought
every thing to light. What should be related, and what should not, has
been published without distinction: "dicenda tacenda locuti!" Every
thing that fell from him has been caught with eagerness by his admirers,
who, as he says in one of his letters, have acted with the diligence of
spies upon his conduct. To some of them the following lines, in Mallet's
poem on verbal criticism, are not inapplicable:
"Such that grave bird in northern seas is found.
Whose name a Dutchman only knows to sound;
Where'er the king of fish moves on before,
This humble friend attends from shore to shore;
With eye still earnest, and with bill inclined,
He picks up what his patron drops behind,
With those choice cates his palate to regale,
And is the careful Tibbald of a whale."
After so many essays and volumes of Johnsoniana, what remains for the
present writer? Perhaps, what has not been attempted; a short, yet full,
a faithful, yet temperate, history of Dr. Johnson.
father, Michael Johnson, was a bookseller in that city; a man of large,
athletic make, and violent passions; wrong-headed, positive, and, at
times, afflicted with a degree of melancholy, little short of madness.
His mother was sister to Dr. Ford, a practising physician, and father of
Cornelius Ford, generally known by the name of parson Ford, the same who
is represented near the punch-bowl in Hogarth's Midnight Modern
Conversation. In the life of Fenton, Johnson says, that "his abilities,
instead of furnishing convivial merriment to the voluptuous and
dissolute, might have enabled him to excel among the virtuous and the
wise." Being chaplain to the earl of Chesterfield, he wished to attend
that nobleman on his embassy to the Hague. Colley Cibber has recorded
the anecdote. "You should go," said the witty peer, "if to your many
vices you would add one more." "Pray, my lord, what is that?"
"Hypocrisy, my dear doctor." Johnson had a younger brother named
Nathaniel, who died at the age of twenty-seven or twenty-eight. Michael
Johnson, the father, was chosen, in the year 1718, under bailiff of
Lichfield; and, in the year 1725, he served the office of the senior
bailiff. He had a brother of the name of Andrew, who, for some years,
kept the ring at Smithfield, appropriated to wrestlers and boxers. Our
author used to say, that he was never thrown or conquered. Michael, the
father, died December 1731, at the age of seventy-six: his mother at
eighty-nine, of a gradual decay, in the year 1759. Of the family nothing
more can be related worthy of notice. Johnson did not delight in talking
of his relations. "There is little pleasure," he said to Mrs. Piozzi,
"in relating the anecdotes of beggary."
Johnson derived from his parents, or from an unwholesome nurse, the
distemper called the king's evil. The Jacobites at that time believed in
the efficacy of the royal touch, and, accordingly, Mrs. Johnson
presented her son, when two years old, before queen Anne, who, for the
first time, performed that office, and communicated to her young patient
scrophulous humour, and the under part of his face was seamed and
disfigured by the operation. It is supposed, that this disease deprived
him of the sight of his left eye, and also impaired his hearing. At
eight years old, he was placed under Mr. Hawkins, at the free school in
Lichfield, where he was not remarkable for diligence or regular
application. Whatever he read, his tenacious memory made his own. In the
fields, with his schoolfellows, he talked more to himself than with his
companions. In 1725, when he was about sixteen years old, he went on a
visit to his cousin Cornelius Ford, who detained him for some months,
and, in the mean time, assisted him in the classics. The general
direction for his studies, which he then received, he related to Mrs.
Piozzi. "Obtain," says Ford, "some general principles of every science:
he who can talk only on one subject, or act only in one department, is
seldom wanted, and, perhaps, never wished for; while the man of general
knowledge can often benefit, and always please." This advice Johnson
seems to have pursued with a good inclination. His reading was always
desultory, seldom resting on any particular author, but rambling from
one book to another, and, by hasty snatches, hoarding up a variety of
knowledge. It may be proper, in this place, to mention another general
rule laid down by Ford for Johnson's future conduct: "You will make your
way the more easily in the world, as you are contented to dispute no
man's claim to conversation excellence: they will, therefore, more
willingly allow your pretensions as a writer." "But," says Mrs. Piozzi,
"the features of peculiarity, which mark a character to all succeeding
generations, are slow in coming to their growth." That ingenious lady
adds, with her usual vivacity, "Can one, on such an occasion, forbear
recollecting the predictions of Boileau's father, who said, stroking the
head of the young satirist, 'This little man has too much wit, but he
will never speak ill of any one.'"
On Johnson's return from Cornelius Ford, Mr. Hunter, then master of the
free school at Lichfield, refused to receive him again on that
foundation. At this distance of time, what his reasons were, it is vain
to inquire; but to refuse assistance to a lad of promising genius must
be pronounced harsh and illiberal. It did not, however, stop the
progress of the young student's education. He was placed at another
school, at Stourbridge in Worcestershire, under the care of Mr.
Wentworth. Having gone through the rudiments of classic literature, he
returned to his father's house, and was probably intended for the trade
of a bookseller. He has been heard to say that he could bind a book. At
the end of two years, being then about nineteen, he went to assist the
studies of a young gentleman, of the name of Corbet, to the university
of Oxford; and on the 31st of October, 1728, both were entered of
Pembroke college; Corbet as a gentleman-commoner, and Johnson as a
commoner. The college tutor, Mr. Jordan, was a man of no genius; and
Johnson, it seems, shewed an early contempt of mean abilities, in one or
two instances behaving with insolence to that gentleman. Of his general
conduct at the university there are no particulars that merit attention,
except the translation of Pope's Messiah, which was a college exercise
imposed upon him as a task by Mr. Jordan. Corbet left the university in
about two years, and Johnson's salary ceased. He was, by consequence,
straitened in his circumstances; but he still remained at college. Mr.
Jordan, the tutor, went off to a living; and was succeeded by Dr. Adams,
who afterwards became head of the college, and was esteemed through life
for his learning, his talents, and his amiable character. Johnson grew
more regular in his attendance. Ethics, theology, and classic
literature, were his favourite studies. He discovered, notwithstanding,
early symptoms of that wandering disposition of mind, which adhered to
him to the end of his life. His reading was by fits and starts,
undirected to any particular science. General philology, agreeably to
his cousin Ford's advice, was the object of his ambition. He received,
at that time, an early impression of piety, and a taste for the best
authors, ancient and modern. It may, notwithstanding, be questioned
whether, except his bible, he ever read a book entirely through. Late in
life, if any man praised a book in his presence, he was sure to ask,
"Did you read it through?" If the answer was in the affirmative, he did
not seem willing to believe it. He continued at the university, till the
want of pecuniary supplies obliged him to quit the place. He obtained,
however, the assistance of a friend, and, returning in a short time, was
able to complete a residence of three years. The history of his exploits
at Oxford, he used to say, was best known to Dr. Taylor and Dr. Adams.
Wonders are told of his memory, and, indeed, all who knew him late in
life can witness, that he retained that faculty in the greatest vigour.
From the university, Johnson returned to Lichfield. His father died soon
after, December, 1731; and the whole receipt out of his effects, as
appeared by a memorandum in the son's handwriting, dated 15th of June,
that poverty should neither depress his spirits nor warp his integrity,
he became under-master of a grammar school at Market Bosworth, in
Leicestershire. That resource, however, did not last long. Disgusted by
the pride of sir Wolstan Dixie, the patron of that little seminary, he
left the place in discontent, and ever after spoke of it with
abhorrence. In 1733, he went on a visit to Mr. Hector, who had been his
schoolfellow, and was then a surgeon at Birmingham, lodging at the house
of Warren, a bookseller. At that place Johnson translated a Voyage to
Abyssinia, written by Jerome Lobo, a Portuguese missionary. This was the
first literary work from the pen of Dr. Johnson. His friend, Hector, was
occasionally his amanuensis. The work was, probably, undertaken at the
desire of Warren, the bookseller, and was printed at Birmingham; but it
appears, in the Literary Magazine, or history of the works of the
learned, for March, 1735, that it was published by Bettesworth and
Hitch, Paternoster row. It contains a narrative of the endeavours of a
company of missionaries to convert the people of Abyssinia to the church
of Rome. In the preface to this work, Johnson observes, "that the
Portuguese traveller, contrary to the general view of his countrymen,
has amused his readers with no romantick absurdities, or incredible
fictions. He appears, by his modest and unaffected narration, to have
described things, as he saw them; to have copied nature from the life;
and to have consulted his senses, not his imagination. He meets with no
basilisks, that destroy with their eyes; his crocodiles devour their
prey, without tears; and his cataracts fall from the rock, without
deafening the neighbouring inhabitants. The reader will here find no
regions cursed with irremediable barrenness, or blessed with spontaneous
fecundity; no perpetual gloom, or unceasing sunshine; nor are the
nations, here described, either void of all sense of humanity, or
consummate in all private and social virtues; here are no Hottentots
without religion, polity or articulate language; no Chinese perfectly
polite, and completely skilled in all sciences; he will discover, what
will always be discovered by a diligent and impartial inquirer, that,
wherever human nature is to be found, there is a mixture of vice and
virtue, a contest of passion and reason; and that the Creator doth not
appear partial in his distributions, but has balanced, in most
countries, their particular inconveniencies, by particular favours."--We
have here an early specimen of Johnson's manner; the vein of thinking,
and the frame of the sentences, are manifestly his: we see the infant
Hercules. The translation of Lobo's narrative has been reprinted lately
in a separate volume, with some other tracts of Dr. Johnson's, and,
therefore, forms no part of this edition; but a compendious account of
so interesting a work, as father Lobo's discovery of the head of the
Nile, will not, it is imagined, be unacceptable to the reader.
"Father Lobo, the Portuguese missionary, embarked, in 1622, in the same
fleet with the count Vidigueira, who was appointed, by the king of
Portugal, viceroy of the Indies. They arrived at Goa; and, in January
Jesuits, sent on the same commission, were murdered in their attempt to
penetrate into that empire. Lobo had better success; he surmounted all
difficulties, and made his way into the heart of the country. Then
follows a description of Abyssinia, formerly the largest empire of which
we have an account in history. It extended from the Red sea to the
kingdom of Congo, and from Egypt to the Indian sea, containing no less
than forty provinces. At the time of Lobo's mission, it was not much
larger than Spain, consisting then but of five kingdoms, of which part
was entirely subject to the emperour, and part paid him a tribute, as an
acknowledgment. The provinces were inhabited by Moors, Pagans, Jews, and
Christians. The last was, in Lobo's time, the established and reigning
religion. The diversity of people and religion is the reason why the
kingdom was under different forms of government, with laws and customs
extremely various. Some of the people neither sowed their lands, nor
improved them by any kind of culture, living upon milk and flesh, and,
like the Arabs, encamping without any settled habitation. In some places
they practised no rites of worship, though they believed that, in the
regions above, there dwells a being that governs the world. This deity
they call, in their language, Oul. The christianity, professed by the
people in some parts, is so corrupted with superstitions, errours, and
heresies, and so mingled with ceremonies borrowed from the Jews, that
little, besides the name of christianity, is to be found among them. The
Abyssins cannot properly be said to have either cities or houses; they
live in tents or cottages made of straw or clay, very rarely building
with stone. Their villages, or towns, consist of these huts; yet even of
such villages they have but few, because the grandees, the viceroys, and
the emperour himself, are always in camp, that they may be prepared,
upon the most sudden alarm, to meet every emergence in a country, which
is engaged, every year, either in foreign wars or intestine commotions.
Aethiopia produces very near the same kinds of provision as Portugal,
though, by the extreme laziness of the inhabitants, in a much less
quantity. What the ancients imagined of the torrid zone being a part of
the world uninhabitable, is so far from being true, that the climate is
very temperate. The blacks have better features than in other countries,
and are not without wit and ingenuity. Their apprehension is quick, and
their judgment sound. There are, in this climate, two harvests in the
year; one in winter, which lasts through the months of July, August, and
September; the other in the spring. They have, in the greatest plenty,
raisins peaches pomegranates, sugar-canes, and some figs. Most of these
are ripe about lent, which the Abyssins keep with great strictness. The
animals of the country are the lion, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the
unicorn, horses, mules, oxen, and cows without number. They have a very
particular custom, which obliges every man, that has a thousand cows, to
save every year one day's milk of all his herd, and make a bath with it
for his relations. This they do so many days in each year, as they have
thousands of cattle; so that, to express how rich a man is, they tell
you, 'he bathes so many times.'
"Of the river Nile, which has furnished so much controversy, we have a
full and clear description. It is called, by the natives, Abavi, the
Father of Water. It rises in Sacala, a province of the kingdom of
Goiama, the most fertile and agreeable part of the Abyssinian dominions.
On the eastern side of the country, on the declivity of a mountain,
whose descent is so easy, that it seems a beautiful plain, is that
source of the Nile, which has been sought after, at so much expense and
labour. This spring, or rather these two springs, are two holes, each
about two feet diameter, a stone's cast distant from each other. One of
them is about five feet and a half in depth. Lobo was not able to sink
his plummet lower, perhaps, because it was stopped by roots, the whole
place being full of trees. A line of ten feet did not reach the bottom
of the other. These springs are supposed, by the Abyssins, to be the
vents of a great subterraneous lake. At a small distance to the south,
is a village called Guix, through which you ascend to the top of the
mountain, where there is a little hill, which the idolatrous Agaci hold
in great veneration. Their priest calls them together to this place once
a year; and every one sacrifices a cow, or more, according to the
different degrees of wealth and devotion. Hence we have sufficient
proof, that these nations always paid adoration to the deity of this
famous river.
"As to the course of the Nile, its waters, after their first rise, run
towards the east, about the length of a musket-shot; then, turning
northward, continue hidden in the grass and weeds for about a quarter of
a league, when they reappear amongst a quantity of rocks. The Nile, from
its source, proceeds with so inconsiderable a current that it is in
danger of being dried up by the hot season; but soon receiving an
increase from the Gemma, the Keltu, the Bransa, and the other smaller
rivers, it expands to such a breadth in the plains of Boad, which is not
above three days' journey from its source, that a musket-ball will
scarcely fly from one bank to the other. Here it begins to run
northward, winding, however, a little to the east, for the space of nine
or ten leagues, and then enters the so-much-talked-of lake of Dambia,
flowing with such violent rapidity, that its waters may be distinguished
through the whole passage, which is no less than six leagues. Here
begins the greatness of the Nile. Fifteen miles farther, in the land of
Alata, it rushes precipitately from the top of a high rock, and forms
one of the most beautiful waterfalls in the world. Lobo says, he passed
under it without being wet, and resting himself, for the sake of the
coolness, was charmed with a thousand delightful rainbows, which the
sunbeams painted on the water, in all their shining and lively
makes a noise that may be heard at a considerable distance: but it was
not found, that the neighbouring inhabitants were deaf. After the
cataract, the Nile collects its scattered stream among the rocks, which
are so near each other, that, in Lobo's time, a bridge of beams, on
which the whole imperial army passed, was laid over them. Sultan Sequed
has since built a stone bridge of one arch, in the same place, for which
purpose he procured masons from India. Here the river alters its course,
and passes through various kingdoms, such as Amhara, Olaca, Choaa,
Damot, and the kingdom of Goiama, and, after various windings, returns
within a short day's journey of its spring. To pursue it through all its
mazes, and accompany it round the kingdom of Goiama, is a journey of
twenty-nine days. From Abyssinia, the river passes into the countries of
Fazulo and Ombarca, two vast regions little known, inhabited by nations
entirely different from the Abyssins. Their hair, like that of the other
blacks in those regions, is short and curled. In the year 1615, Rassela
Christos, lieutenant-general to sultan Sequed, entered those kingdoms in
a hostile manner; but, not being able to get intelligence, returned
without attempting any thing. As the empire of Abyssinia terminates at
these descents, Lobo followed the course of the Nile no farther, leaving
it to rage over barbarous kingdoms, and convey wealth and plenty into
Aegypt, which owes to the annual inundations of this river its envied
except that it receives great increase from many other rivers, has
several cataracts like that already described, and that few fish are to
be found in it: that scarcity is to be attributed to the river-horse,
and the crocodile, which destroy the weaker inhabitants of the river.
Something, likewise, must be imputed to the cataracts, where fish cannot
fall without being killed. Lobo adds, that neither he, nor any with whom
he conversed about the crocodile, ever saw him weep; and, therefore, all
that hath been said about his tears, must be ranked among the fables,
invented for the amusement of children.
"As to the causes of the inundations of the Nile, Lobo observes, that
many an idle hypothesis has been framed. Some theorists ascribe it to
the high winds, that stop the current, and force the water above its
banks. Others pretend a subterraneous communication between the ocean
and the Nile, and that the sea, when violently agitated, swells the
river. Many are of opinion, that this mighty flood proceeds from the
melting of the snow on the mountains of Aethiopia; but so much snow and
such prodigious heat are never met with in the same region. Lobo never
saw snow in Abyssinia, except on mount Semen, in the kingdom of Tigre,
very remote from the Nile; and on Namara, which is, indeed, nor far
distant, but where there never falls snow enough to wet, when dissolved,
the foot of the mountain. To the immense labours of the Portuguese
mankind is indebted for the knowledge of the real cause of these
inundations, so great and so regular. By them we are informed, that
Abyssinia, where the Nile rises, is full of mountains, and, in its
natural situation, is much higher than Aegypt; that in the winter, from
June to September, no day is without rain; that the Nile receives in its
course, all the rivers, brooks, and torrents, that fall from those
mountains, and, by necessary consequence, swelling above its banks,
fills the plains of Aegypt with inundations, which come regularly about
the month of July, or three weeks after the beginning of the rainy
season in Aethiopia. The different degrees of this flood are such
certain indications of the fruitfulness or sterility of the ensuing
year, that it is publickly proclaimed at Cairo how much the water hath
gained during the night."
Such is the account of the Nile and its inundations, which, it is hoped,
will not be deemed an improper or tedious digression, especially as the
whole is an extract from Johnson's translation. He is, all the time, the
actor in the scene, and, in his own words, relates the story. Having
finished this work, he returned in February, 1734, to his native city;
and, in the month of August following, published proposals for printing,
by subscription, the Latin poems of Politian, with the history of Latin
poetry, from the aera of Petrarch to the time of Politian; and also the
life of Politian, to be added by the editor, Samuel Johnson. The book to
be printed in thirty octavo sheets, price five shillings. It is to be
regretted that this project failed for want of encouragement. Johnson,
it seems, differed from Boileau, Voltaire, and D'Alembert, who had taken
upon them to proscribe all modern efforts to write with elegance in a
dead language. For a decision pronounced in so high a tone, no good
reason can be assigned. The interests of learning require, that the
diction of Greece and Rome should be cultivated with care; and he who
can write a language with correctness, will be most likely to understand
its idiom, its grammar, and its peculiar graces of style. What man of
taste would willingly forego the pleasure of reading Vida, Fracastorius,
Sannazaro, Strada, and others, down to the late elegant productions of
bishop Lowth? The history which Johnson proposed to himself would,
beyond all question, have been a valuable addition to the history of
letters; but his project failed. His next expedient was to offer his
assistance to Cave, the original projector of the Gentleman's Magazine.
For this purpose he sent his proposals in a letter, offering, on
reasonable terms, occasionally to fill some pages with poems and
inscriptions, never printed before; with fugitive pieces that deserved
to be revived, and critical remarks on authors, ancient and modern. Cave
agreed to retain him as a correspondent and contributor to the magazine.
What the conditions were cannot now be known; but, certainly, they were
not sufficient to hinder Johnson from casting his eyes about him in
quest of other employment. Accordingly, in 1735, he made overtures to
the reverend Mr. Budworth, master of a grammar school at Brerewood, in
Staffordshire, to become his assistant. This proposition did not
succeed. Mr. Budworth apprehended, that the involuntary motions, to
which Johnson's nerves were subject, might make him an object of
ridicule with his scholars, and, by consequence, lessen their respect
for their master. Another mode of advancing himself presented itself
about this time. Mrs. Porter, the widow of a mercer in Birmingham,
admired his talents. It is said, that she had about eight hundred
pounds; and that sum, to a person in Johnson's circumstances, was an
affluent fortune. A marriage took place; and, to turn his wife's money
to the best advantage, he projected the scheme of an academy for
education. Gilbert Walmsley, at that time, registrar of the
ecclesiastical court of the bishop of Lichfield, was distinguished by
his erudition, and the politeness of his manners. He was the friend of
Johnson, and, by his weight and influence, endeavoured to promote his
interest. The celebrated Garrick, whose father, captain Garrick, lived
at Lichfield, was placed in the new seminary of education by that
gentleman's advice.--Garrick was then about eighteen years old. An
accession of seven or eight pupils was the most that could be obtained,
near Lichfield, in Staffordshire, young gentlemen are boarded and taught
the Latin and Greek languages, by Samuel Johnson.
The undertaking proved abortive. Johnson, having now abandoned all hopes
of promoting his fortune in the country, determined to become an
adventurer in the world at large. His young pupil, Garrick, had formed
the same resolution; and, accordingly, in March, 1737, they arrived in
London together. Two such candidates for fame, perhaps never, before
that day, entered the metropolis together. Their stock of money was soon
exhausted. In his visionary project of an academy, Johnson had probably
wasted his wife's substance; and Garrick's father had little more than
his half-pay.--The two fellow-travellers had the world before them, and
each was to choose his road to fortune and to fame. They brought with
them genius, and powers of mind, peculiarly formed by nature for the
different vocations to which each of them felt himself inclined. They
acted from the impulse of young minds, even then meditating great
things, and with courage anticipating success. Their friend, Mr.
Walmsley, by a letter to the reverend Mr. Colson, who, it seems, was a
great mathematician, exerted his good offices in their favour. He gave
notice of their intended journey: "Davy Garrick," he said, "will be with
you next week; and Johnson, to try his fate with a tragedy, and to get
himself employed in some translation, either from the Latin or French.
Johnson is a very good scholar and a poet, and, I have great hopes, will
turn out a fine tragedy-writer. If it should be in your way, I doubt not
but you will be ready to recommend and assist your countrymen." Of Mr.
Walmsley's merit, and the excellence of his character, Johnson has left
a beautiful testimonial at the end of the life of Edmund Smith. It is
reasonable to conclude, that a mathematician, absorbed in abstract
speculations, was not able to find a sphere of action for two men, who
were to be the architects of their own fortune. In three or four years
afterwards, Garrick came forth with talents that astonished the public.
He began his career at Goodman's fields, and there, "monstratus fatis
Vespasianus!" he chose a lucrative profession, and, consequently, soon
emerged from all his difficulties. Johnson was left to toil in the
humble walks of literature. A tragedy, as appears by Walmsley's letter,
was the whole of his stock. This, most probably, was Irene; but, if then
finished, it was doomed to wait for a more happy period. It was offered
to Fleetwood, and rejected. Johnson looked round him for employment.
Having, while he remained in the country, corresponded with Cave, under
a feigned name, he now thought it time to make himself known to a man,
whom he considered as a patron of literature. Cave had announced, by
public advertisement, a prize of fifty pounds for the best poem on life,
death, judgment, heaven, and hell; and this circumstance diffused an
idea of his liberality. Johnson became connected with him in business,
and in a close and intimate acquaintance. Of Cave's character it is
unnecessary to say any thing in this place, as Johnson was afterwards
the biographer of his first and most useful patron. To be engaged in the
translation of some important book was still the object which Johnson
had in view. For this purpose, he proposed to give the history of the
council of Trent, with copious notes, then lately added to a French
edition. Twelve sheets of this work were printed, for which Johnson
received forty-nine pounds, as appears by his receipt, in the
possession of Mr. Nichols, the compiler of that entertaining and useful
work, The Gentleman's Magazine. Johnson's translation was never
completed: a like design was offered to the public, under the patronage
of Dr. Zachary Pearce; and, by that contention, both attempts were
frustrated. Johnson had been commended by Pope, for the translation of
the Messiah into Latin verse; but he knew no approach to so eminent a
man. With one, however, who was connected with Pope, he became
acquainted at St. John's gate; and that person was no other than the
well-known Richard Savage, whose life was afterwards written by Johnson
with great elegance, and a depth of moral reflection. Savage was a man
of considerable talents. His address, his various accomplishments, and,
above all, the peculiarity of his misfortunes, recommended him to
Johnson's notice. They became united in the closest intimacy. Both had
great parts, and they were equally under the pressure of want. Sympathy
joined them in a league of friendship. Johnson has been often heard to
relate, that he and Savage walked round Grosvenor square till four in
the morning; in the course of their conversation reforming the world,
dethroning princes, establishing new forms of government, and giving
laws to the several states of Europe, till, fatigued at length with
their legislative office, they began to feel the want of refreshment,
but could not muster up more than four-pence-halfpenny. Savage, it is
true, had many vices; but vice could never strike its roots in a mind
like Johnson's, seasoned early with religion, and the principles of
moral rectitude. His first prayer was composed in the year 1738. He had
not, at that time, renounced the use of wine; and, no doubt,
occasionally enjoyed his friend and his bottle. The love of late hours,
which followed him through life, was, perhaps, originally contracted in
company with Savage. However that may be, their connexion was not of
long duration. In the year 1738, Savage was reduced to the last
distress. Mr. Pope, in a letter to him, expressed his concern for "the
miserable withdrawing of his pension after the death of the queen;" and
gave him hopes that, "in a short time, he should find himself supplied
with a competence, without any dependance on those little creatures,
whom we are pleased to call the great." The scheme proposed to him was,
that he should retire to Swansea in Wales, and receive an allowance of
fifty pounds a year, to be raised by subscription: Pope was to pay
twenty pounds. This plan, though finally established, took more than a
year before it was carried into execution. In the mean time, the
intended retreat of Savage called to Johnson's mind the third satire of
Juvenal, in which that poet takes leave of a friend, who was withdrawing
himself from all the vices of Rome. Struck with this idea, he wrote that
well-known poem, called London. The first lines manifestly point to
Savage.
"Though grief and fondness in my breast rebel,
When injur'd Thales bids the town farewell;
Yet still my calmer thoughts his choice commend;
I praise the hermit, but regret the friend:
Resolv'd, at length, from vice and London far,
To breathe, in distant fields, a purer air;
And, fix'd on Cambria's solitary shore,
Give to St. David one true Briton more."
Johnson, at that time, lodged at Greenwich. He there fixes the scene,
and takes leave of his friend; who, he says in his life, parted from him
with tears in his eyes. The poem, when finished, was offered to Cave. It
happened, however, that the late Mr. Dodsley was the purchaser, at the
price of ten guineas. It was published in 1738; and Pope, we are told,
said, "The author, whoever he is, will not be long concealed;" alluding
to the passage in Terence, "Ubi, ubi est, diu celari non potest."
Notwithstanding that prediction, it does not appear that, besides the
copy-money, any advantage accrued to the author of a poem, written with
the elegance and energy of Pope. Johnson, in August, 1738, went, with
all the fame of his poetry, to offer himself a candidate for the
mastership of the school at Appleby, in Leicestershire. The statutes of
the place required, that the person chosen should be a master of arts.
To remove this objection, the then lord Gower was induced to write to a
friend, in order to obtain for Johnson a master's degree in the
university of Dublin, by the recommendation of Dr. Swift. The letter was
printed in one of the magazines, and was as follows:
SIR,--Mr. Samuel Johnson, author of London, a satire, and some other
poetical pieces, is a native of this county, and much respected by some
worthy gentlemen in the neighbourhood, who are trustees of a
charity-school, now vacant; the certain salary of which is sixty pounds
per year, of which they are desirous to make him master; but,
unfortunately, he is not capable of receiving their bounty, which would
make him happy for life, by not being a master of arts, which, by the
statutes of the school, the master of it must be.
Now these gentlemen do me the honour to think, that I have interest
enough in you, to prevail upon you to write to dean Swift, to persuade
the university of Dublin to send a diploma to me, constituting this poor
man master of arts in their university. They highly extol the man's
learning and probity; and will not be persuaded, that the university
will make any difficulty of conferring such a favour upon a stranger, if
he is recommended by the dean. They say, he is not afraid of the
strictest examination, though he is of so long a journey; and yet he
will venture it, if the dean thinks it necessary, choosing rather to die
upon the road, than to be starved to death in translating for
booksellers, which has been his only subsistence for some time past.
I fear there is more difficulty in this affair than these good-natured
gentlemen apprehend, especially as their election cannot be delayed
longer than the eleventh of next month. If you see this matter in the
same light that it appears to me, I hope you will burn this, and pardon
me for giving you so much trouble about an impracticable thing; but, if
you think there is a probability of obtaining the favour asked, I am
sure your humanity and propensity to relieve merit, in distress, will
incline you to serve the poor man, without my adding any more to the
trouble I have already given you, than assuring you, that I am, with
great truth, sir,
Your faithful humble servant,
Trentham, Aug. 1st.              GOWER.
This scheme miscarried. There is reason to think, that Swift declined to
meddle in the business; and, to that circumstance, Johnson's known
dislike of Swift has been often imputed.
It is mortifying to pursue a man of merit through all his difficulties;
and yet this narrative must be, through many following years, the
history of genius and virtue struggling with adversity. Having lost the
school at Appleby, Johnson was thrown back on the metropolis. Bred to no
profession, without relations, friends, or interest, he was condemned to
drudgery in the service of Cave, his only patron. In November, 1738, was
published a translation of Crousaz's Examen of Pope's Essay on Man;
containing a succinct view of the system of the fatalists, and a
confutation of their opinions; with an illustration of the doctrine of
free will; and an enquiry, what view Mr. Pope might have in touching
upon the Leibnitzian philosophy, and fatalism: by Mr. Crousaz, professor
of philosophy and mathematics at Lausanne. This translation has been
generally thought a production of Johnson's pen; but it is now known,
that Mrs. Elizabeth Carter has acknowledged it to be one of her early
performances. It is certain, however, that Johnson was eager to promote
the publication. He considered the foreign philosopher as a man zealous
in the cause of religion; and with him he was willing to join against
the system of the fatalists, and the doctrine of Leibnitz. It is well
known, that Warburton wrote a vindication of Mr. Pope; but there is
reason to think, that Johnson conceived an early prejudice against the
Essay on Man; and what once took root in a mind like his, was not easily
eradicated. His letter to Cave on this subject is still extant, and may
well justify sir John Hawkins, who inferred that Johnson was the
translator of Crousaz. The conclusion of the letter is remarkable: "I am
yours, Impransus." If by that Latin word was meant, that he had not
dined, because he wanted the means, who can read it, even at this hour,
without an aching heart?
With a mind naturally vigorous, and quickened by necessity, Johnson
formed a multiplicity of projects; but most of them proved abortive. A
number of small tracts issued from his pen with wonderful rapidity; such
as Marmor Norfolciense; or an essay on an ancient prophetical
inscription, in monkish rhyme, discovered at Lynn, in Norfolk. By Probus
Britannicus. This was a pamphlet against sir Robert Walpole. According
to sir John Hawkins, a warrant was issued to apprehend the author, who
retired, with his wife, to an obscure lodging near Lambeth marsh, and
there eluded the search of the messengers. But this story has no
foundation in truth. Johnson was never known to mention such an incident
in his life; and Mr. Steele, late of the treasury, caused diligent
search to be made at the proper offices, and no trace of such a
proceeding could be found. In the same year (1739) the lord chamberlain
prohibited the representation of a tragedy, called Gustavus Vasa, by
Henry Brooke. Under the mask of irony, Johnson published, A Vindication
of the Licenser from the malicious and scandalous Aspersions of Mr.
Brooke. Of these two pieces, sir John Hawkins says, "they have neither
learning nor wit; nor a single ray of that genius, which has since
blazed forth;" but, as they have been lately reprinted, the reader, who
wishes to gratify his curiosity, is referred to the fourteenth volume of
Blake, Barratier, father Paul, and others, were, about that time,
printed in the Gentleman's Magazine. The subscription of fifty pounds a
year for Savage was completed; and, in July 1739, Johnson parted with
the companion of his midnight hours, never to see him more. The
separation was, perhaps, an advantage to him, who wanted to make a right
use of his time, and even then beheld, with self-reproach, the waste
occasioned by dissipation. His abstinence from wine and strong liquors
began soon after the departure of Savage. What habits he contracted in
the course of that acquaintance cannot now be known. The ambition of
excelling in conversation, and that pride of victory, which, at times,
disgraced a man of Johnson's genius, were, perhaps, native blemishes. A
fierce spirit of independence, even in the midst of poverty, may be seen
in Savage; and, if not thence transfused by Johnson into his own
manners, it may, at least, be supposed to have gained strength from the
example before him. During that connexion, there was, if we believe sir
John Hawkins, a short separation between our author and his wife; but a
reconciliation soon took place. Johnson loved her, and showed his
affection in various modes of gallantry, which Garrick used to render
ridiculous by his mimicry. The affectation of soft and fashionable airs
did not become an unwieldy figure: his admiration was received by the
wife with the flutter of an antiquated coquette; and both, it is well
known, furnished matter for the lively genius of Garrick.
It is a mortifying reflection, that Johnson, with a store of learning
and extraordinary talents, was not able, at the age of thirty, to force
his way to the favour of the public:
"Slow rises worth by poverty depress'd."
"He was still," as he says himself, "to provide for the day that was
passing over him." He saw Cave involved in a state of warfare with the
numerous competitors, at that time, struggling with the Gentleman's
Magazine; and gratitude for such supplies as Johnson received, dictated
a Latin ode on the subject of that contention. The first lines,
"Urbane, nullis fesse laboribus,
Urbane, nullis victe calumniis,"
put one in mind of Casimir's ode to Pope Urban:
"Urbane, regum maxime, maxime
Urbane vatum."--
The Polish poet was, probably, at that time, in the hands of a man, who
had meditated the history of the Latin poets. Guthrie, the historian,
had, from July, 1736, composed the parliamentary speeches for the
magazine; but, from the beginning of the session, which opened on the
continued it from that time to the debate on spirituous liquors, which
happened in the house of lords, in February, 1742-3. The eloquence, the
force of argument, and the splendor of language, displayed in the
several speeches, are well known, and universally admired. That Johnson
was the author of the debates, during that period, was not generally
known; but the secret transpired several years afterwards, and was
avowed, by himself, on the following occasion. Mr. Wedderburne, now lord
present writer, and others, dined with the late Mr. Foote. An important
debate, towards the end of sir Robert Walpole's administration, being
mentioned, Dr. Francis observed, "that Mr. Pitt's speech, on that
occasion, was the best he had ever read." He added, "that he had
employed eight years of his life in the study of Demosthenes, and
finished a translation of that celebrated orator, with all the
decorations of style and language within the reach of his capacity; but
he had met with nothing equal to the speech above mentioned." Many of
the company remembered the debate, and some passages were cited, with
the approbation and applause of all present. During the ardour of
conversation, Johnson remained silent. As soon as the warmth of praise
subsided, he opened with these words: "That speech I wrote in a garret
in Exeter street." The company was struck with astonishment. After
staring at each other in silent amaze, Dr. Francis asked, "how that
speech could be written by him?" "Sir," said Johnson, "I wrote it in
Exeter street. I never had been in the gallery of the house of commons
but once. Cave had interest with the door-keepers. He, and the persons
employed under him, gained admittance; they brought away the subject of
discussion, the names of the speakers, the side they took, and the order
in which they rose, together with notes of the arguments advanced in the
course of the debate. The whole was afterwards communicated to me, and I
composed the speeches in the form which they now have in the
parliamentary debates." To this discovery, Dr. Francis made answer:
"Then, sir, you have exceeded Demosthenes himself; for to say, that you
have exceeded Francis's Demosthenes, would be saying nothing." The rest
of the company bestowed lavish encomiums on Johnson: one, in particular,
praised his impartiality; observing, that he dealt out reason and
eloquence, with an equal hand to both parties. "That is not quite true,"
said Johnson; "I saved appearances tolerably well; but I took care that
the WHIG DOGS should not have the best of it." The sale of the magazine
was greatly increased by the parliamentary debates, which were continued
by Johnson till the month of March, 1742-3. From that time the magazine
was conducted by Dr. Hawkesworth.
In 1743-4, Osborne, the bookseller, who kept a shop in Gray's inn,
purchased the earl of Oxford's library, at the price of thirteen
thousand pounds. He projected a catalogue in five octavo volumes, at
five shillings each. Johnson was employed in that painful drudgery. He
was, likewise, to collect all such small tracts as were, in any degree,
worth preserving, in order to reprint and publish the whole in a
collection, called The Harleian Miscellany. The catalogue was completed;
and the miscellany, in 1749, was published in eight quarto volumes. In
this business Johnson was a day-labourer for immediate subsistence, not
unlike Gustavus Vasa, working in the mines of Dalecarlia. What Wilcox, a
bookseller of eminence in the Strand, said to Johnson, on his first
arrival in town, was now almost confirmed. He lent our author five
guineas, and then asked him, "How do you mean to earn your livelihood in
this town?" "By my literary labours," was the answer. Wilcox, staring at
him, shook his head: "By your literary labours! You had better buy a
porter's knot." Johnson used to tell this anecdote to Mr. Nichols: but
he said, "Wilcox was one of my best friends, and he meant well." In
fact, Johnson, while employed in Gray's inn, may be said to have carried
a porter's knot. He paused occasionally to peruse the book that came to
his hand. Osborne thought that such curiosity tended to nothing but
delay, and objected to it with all the pride and insolence of a man who
knew that he paid daily wages. In the dispute that of course ensued,
Osborne, with that roughness which was natural to him, enforced his
argument by giving the lie. Johnson seized a folio, and knocked the
bookseller down. This story has been related as an instance of Johnson's
ferocity; but merit cannot always take the spurns of the unworthy with a
That the history of an author must be found in his works is, in general,
a true observation; and was never more apparent than in the present
narrative. Every aera of Johnson's life is fixed by his writings. In
of Shakespeare. As a prelude to that design, he published, in 1745,
Miscellaneous Observations on the Tragedy of Macbeth, with remarks on
sir Thomas Hanmer's edition; to which were prefixed, Proposals for a new
Edition of Shakespeare, with a specimen. Of this pamphlet, Warburton, in
the preface to Shakespeare, has given his opinion: "As to all those
things, which have been published under the title of essays, remarks,
observations, &c. on Shakespeare, if you except some critical notes on
Macbeth, given as a specimen of a projected edition, and written, as
appears, by a man of parts and genius, the rest are absolutely below a
serious notice." But the attention of the public was not excited; there
was no friend to promote a subscription; and the project died to revive
at a future day. A new undertaking, however, was soon after proposed;
namely, an English dictionary upon an enlarged plan. Several of the most
opulent booksellers had meditated a work of this kind; and the agreement
was soon adjusted between the parties. Emboldened by this connexion,
Johnson thought of a better habitation than he had hitherto known. He
had lodged with his wife in courts and alleys about the Strand; but now,
for the purpose of carrying on his arduous undertaking, and to be nearer
his printer and friend, Mr. Strahan, he ventured to take a house in
Gough square, Fleet street. He was told, that the earl of Chesterfield
was a friend to his undertaking; and, in consequence of that
intelligence, he published, in 1747, The Plan of a Dictionary of the
English Language, addressed to the right honourable Philip Dormer, earl
of Chesterfield, one of his majesty's principal secretaries of state.
Mr. Whitehead, afterwards poet laureate, undertook to convey the
manuscript to his lordship: the consequence was an invitation from lord
Chesterfield to the author. A stronger contrast of characters could not
be brought together; the nobleman, celebrated for his wit, and all the
graces of polite behaviour; the author, conscious of his own merit,
towering in idea above all competition, versed in scholastic logic, but
a stranger to the arts of polite conversation, uncouth, vehement, and
vociferous. The coalition was too unnatural. Johnson expected a
Maecenas, and was disappointed. No patronage, no assistance followed.
Visits were repeated; but the reception was not cordial. Johnson, one
day, was left a full hour, waiting in an antichamber, till a gentleman
should retire, and leave his lordship at leisure. This was the famous
Colley Cibber. Johnson saw him go, and, fired with indignation, rushed
"There is a man, whose moral character, deep learning, and superior
parts, I acknowledge, admire, and respect; but whom it is so impossible
for me to love, that I am almost in a fever, whenever I am in his
company. His figure (without being deformed) seems made to disgrace or
ridicule the common structure of the human body. His legs and arms are
never in the position which, according to the situation of his body,
they ought to be in, but constantly employed in committing acts of
hostility upon the graces. He throws any where, but down his throat,
whatever he means to drink; and mangles what he means to carve.
Inattentive to all the regards of social life, he mistimes and misplaces
every thing. He disputes with heat indiscriminately, mindless of the
rank, character, and situation of those with whom he disputes.
Absolutely ignorant of the several gradations of familiarity and
respect, he is exactly the same to his superiors, his equals, and his
inferiors; and, therefore, by a necessary consequence, is absurd to two
of the three. Is it possible to love such a man? No. The utmost I can do
for him is, to consider him a respectable Hottentot." Such was the idea
entertained by lord Chesterfield. After the incident of Colley Cibber,
Johnson never repeated his visits. In his high and decisive tone, he has
been often heard to say, "lord Chesterfield is a wit among lords, and a
lord among wits."
In the course of the year 1747, Garrick, in conjunction with Lacy,
became patentee of Drury lane playhouse. For the opening of the theatre,
at the usual time, Johnson wrote, for his friend, the well-known
prologue, which, to say no more of it, may, at least, be placed on a
level with Pope's to the tragedy of Cato. The playhouse being now under
Garrick's direction, Johnson thought the opportunity fair to think of
his tragedy of Irene, which was his whole stock on his first arrival in
town, in the year 1737. That play was, accordingly, put into rehearsal
in January, 1749. As a precursor to prepare the way, and to awaken the
public attention, The Vanity of human Wishes, a poem in imitation of the
tenth satire of Juvenal, by the author of London, was published in the
same month. In the Gentleman's Magazine, for February, 1749, we find
that the tragedy of Irene was acted at Drury lane, on Monday, February
the 6th, and, from that time, without interruption, to Monday, February
the 20th, being in all thirteen nights. Since that time, it has not been
exhibited on any stage. Irene may be added to some other plays in our
language, which have lost their place in the theatre, but continue to
please in the closet. During the representation of this piece, Johnson
attended every night behind the scenes. Conceiving that his character,
as an author, required some ornament for his person, he chose, upon that
occasion, to decorate himself with a handsome waistcoat, and a gold-laced
hat. The late Mr. Topham Beauclerc, who had a great deal of that
humour, which pleases the more for seeming undesigned, used to give a
pleasant description of this green-room finery, as related by the author
himself; "But," said Johnson, with great gravity, "I soon laid aside my
gold-laced hat, lest it should make me proud." The amount of the three
benefit nights for the tragedy of Irene, it is to be feared, was not
very considerable, as the profit, that stimulating motive, never invited
the author to another dramatic attempt. Some years afterwards, when the
present writer was intimate with Garrick, and knew Johnson to be in
distress, he asked the manager, why he did not produce another tragedy
for his Lichfield friend? Garrick's answer was remarkable: "When Johnson
writes tragedy, 'declamation roars, and passion sleeps:' when
Shakespeare wrote, he dipped his pen in his own heart."
There may, perhaps, be a degree of sameness in this regular way of
tracing an author from one work to another, and the reader may feel the
effect of a tedious monotony; but, in the life of Johnson, there are no
other landmarks. He was now forty years old, and had mixed but little
with the world. He followed no profession, transacted no business, and
was a stranger to what is called a town life. We are now arrived at the
brightest period, he had hitherto known. His name broke out upon mankind
with a degree of lustre that promised a triumph over all his
difficulties. The life of Savage was admired, as a beautiful and
instructive piece of biography. The two imitations of Juvenal were
thought to rival even the excellence of Pope; and the tragedy of Irene,
though uninteresting on the stage, was universally admired in the
closet, for the propriety of the sentiments, the richness of the
language, and the general harmony of the whole composition. His fame was
widely diffused; and he had made his agreement with the booksellers for
his English dictionary at the sum of fifteen hundred guineas; a part of
which was to be, from time to time, advanced, in proportion to the
progress of the work. This was a certain fund for his support, without
being obliged to write fugitive pieces for the petty supplies of the
day. Accordingly we find that, in 1749, he established a club,
consisting of ten in number, at Horseman's, in Ivy lane, on every
Tuesday evening. This is the first scene of social life to which Johnson
can be traced, out of his own house. The members of this little society
were, Samuel Johnson; Dr. Salter, father of the late master of the
Charter house; Dr. Hawkesworth; Mr. Ryland, a merchant; Mr. Payne, a
bookseller, in Paternoster row; Mr. Samuel Dyer, a learned young man;
Dr. William M'Ghie, a Scotch physician; Dr. Edmund Barker, a young
physician; Dr. Bathurst, another young physician; and sir John Hawkins.
This list is given by sir John, as it should seem, with no other view
than to draw a spiteful and malevolent character of almost every one of
them. Mr. Dyer, whom sir John says he loved with the affection of a
brother, meets with the harshest treatment, because it was his maxim,
that "to live in peace with mankind, and in a temper to do good offices,
was the most essential part of our duty." That notion of moral goodness
gave umbrage to sir John Hawkins, and drew down upon the memory of his
friend, the bitterest imputations. Mr. Dyer, however, was admired and
loved through life. He was a man of literature. Johnson loved to enter
with him into a discussion of metaphysical, moral, and critical
subjects; in those conflicts, exercising his talents, and, according to
his custom, always contending for victory. Dr. Bathurst was the person
on whom Johnson fixed his affection. He hardly ever spoke of him without
tears in his eyes. It was from him, who was a native of Jamaica, that
account of his master, he valued to the end of his life. At the time of
instituting the club in Ivy lane, Johnson had projected the Rambler. The
title was most probably suggested by the Wanderer; a poem which he
mentions, with the warmest praise, in the life of Savage. With the same
spirit of independence with which he wished to live, it was now his
pride to write. He communicated his plan to none of his friends: he
desired no assistance, relying entirely on his own fund, and the
protection of the divine being, which he implored in a solemn form of
prayer, composed by himself for the occasion. Having formed a resolution
to undertake a work that might be of use and honour to his country, he
thought, with Milton, that this was not to be obtained "but by devout
prayer to that eternal spirit, that can enrich with all utterance and
knowledge, and send out his seraphim with the hallowed fire of his
altar, to touch and purify the lips of whom he pleases."
Having invoked the special protection of heaven, and by that act of
piety fortified his mind, he began the great work of the Rambler. The
first number was published on Tuesday, March the 20th, 1750; and from
that time was continued regularly every Tuesday and Saturday, for the
space of two years, when it finally closed on Saturday, March 14, 1752.
As it began with motives of piety, so it appears that the same religious
spirit glowed, with unabating ardour, to the last. His conclusion is:
"The essays professedly serious, if I have been able to execute my own
intentions, will be found exactly conformable to the precepts of
christianity, without any accommodation to the licentiousness and levity
of the present age. I, therefore, look back on this part of my work with
pleasure, which no man shall diminish or augment. I shall never envy the
honours which wit and learning obtain in any other cause, if I can be
numbered among the writers who have given ardour to virtue, and
confidence to truth." The whole number of essays amounted to two hundred
and eight. Addison's, in the Spectator, are more in number, but not half
in point of quantity: Addison was not bound to publish on stated days;
he could watch the ebb and flow of his genius, and send his paper to the
press, when his own taste was satisfied. Johnson's case was very
different. He wrote singly and alone. In the whole progress of the work
he did not receive more than ten essays. This was a scanty contribution.
For the rest, the author has described his situation: "He that condemns
himself to compose on a stated day, will often bring to his task an
attention dissipated, a memory embarrassed, an imagination overwhelmed,
a mind distracted with anxieties, a body languishing with disease: he
will labour on a barren topick, till it is too late to change it; or, in
the ardour of invention, diffuse his thoughts into wild exuberance,
which the pressing hour of publication cannot suffer judgment to examine
or reduce." Of this excellent production, the number sold on each day
did not amount to five hundred: of course, the bookseller, who paid the
author four guineas a week, did not carry on a successful trade. His
generosity and perseverance deserve to be commended; and happily, when
the collection appeared in volumes, were amply rewarded. Johnson lived
to see his labours nourish in a tenth edition. His posterity, as an
ingenious French writer has said, on a similar occasion, began in his
life-time.
In the beginning of 1750, soon after the Rambler was set on foot,
Johnson was induced, by the arts of a vile impostor, to lend his
assistance, during a temporary delusion, to a fraud not to be paralleled
had been a teacher in the university of Edinburgh, had conceived a
mortal antipathy to the name and character of Milton. His reason was,
because the prayer of Pamela, in sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, was, as he
supposed, maliciously inserted by the great poet in an edition of the
Eikon Basilike, in order to fix an imputation of impiety on the
memory of the murdered king. Fired with resentment, and willing to reap
the profits of a gross imposition, this man collected, from several
Latin poets, such as Masenius the jesuit, Staphorstius, a Dutch divine,
Beza, and others, all such passages as bore any kind of resemblance to
different places in the Paradise Lost; and these he published, from time
to time, in the Gentleman's Magazine, with occasional interpolations of
lines, which he himself translated from Milton. The public credulity
swallowed all with eagerness; and Milton was supposed to be guilty of
plagiarism from inferior modern writers. The fraud succeeded so well,
that Lauder collected the whole into a volume, and advertised it under
the title of An Essay on Milton's Use and Imitation of the Moderns, in
his Paradise Lost; dedicated to the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge. While the book was in the press, the proof-sheets were shown
to Johnson, at the Ivy lane club, by Payne, the bookseller, who was one
of the members. No man in that society was in possession of the authors
from whom Lauder professed to make his extracts. The charge was
believed, and the contriver of it found his way to Johnson, who is
represented, by sir John Hawkins, not indeed as an accomplice in the
fraud, but, through motives of malignity to Milton, delighting in the
detection, and exulting that the poet's reputation would suffer by the
discovery. More malice to a deceased friend cannot well be imagined.
Hawkins adds, "that he wished well to the argument must be inferred from
the preface, which, indubitably, was written by him." The preface, it is
well known, was written by Johnson, and for that reason is inserted in
this edition. But if Johnson approved of the argument, it was no longer
than while he believed it founded in truth. Let us advert to his own
words in that very preface. "Among the inquiries to which the ardour of
criticism has naturally given occasion, none is more obscure in itself,
or more worthy of rational curiosity, than a retrospection of the
progress of this mighty genius in the construction of his work; a view
of the fabrick gradually rising, perhaps from small beginnings, till its
foundation rests in the centre, and its turrets sparkle in the skies; to
trace back the structure, through all its varieties, to the simplicity
of the first plan; to find what was projected, whence the scheme was
taken, how it was improved, by what assistance it was executed, and from
what stores the materials were collected; whether its founder dug them
from the quarries of nature, or demolished other buildings to embellish
his own." These were the motives that induced Johnson to assist Lauder
with a preface; and are not these the motives of a critic and a scholar?
What reader of taste, what man of real knowledge, would not think his
time well employed in an enquiry so curious, so interesting, and
instructive? If Lauder's facts were really true, who would not be glad,
without the smallest tincture of malevolence, to receive real
information? It is painful to be thus obliged to vindicate a man who, in
his heart, towered above the petty arts of fraud and imposition, against
an injudicious biographer, who undertook to be his editor, and the
protector of his memory. Another writer, Dr. Towers, in an Essay on the
Life and Character of Dr. Johnson, seems to countenance this calumny. He
says: "It can hardly be doubted, but that Johnson's aversion to
Milton's politics was the cause of that alacrity, with which he joined
with Lauder in his infamous attack on our great epic poet, and which
induced him to assist in that transaction." These words would seem to
describe an accomplice, were they not immediately followed by an express
declaration, that Johnson was "unacquainted with the imposture." Dr.
Towers adds, "It seems to have been, by way of making some compensation
to the memory of Milton, for the share he had in the attack of Lauder,
that Johnson wrote the prologue, spoken by Garrick, at Drury lane
theatre, 1750, on the performance of the Masque of Comus, for the
benefit of Milton's granddaughter." Dr. Towers is not free from
prejudice; but, as Shakespeare has it, "he begets a temperance, to give
it smoothness." He is, therefore, entitled to a dispassionate answer.
When Johnson wrote the prologue, it does appear that he was aware of the
malignant artifices practised by Lauder. In the postscript to Johnson's
preface, a subscription is proposed, for relieving the granddaughter of
the author of Paradise Lost. Dr. Towers will agree, that this shows
Johnson's alacrity in doing good. That alacrity showed itself again, in
the letter printed in the European Magazine, January, 1785, and there
said to have appeared originally in the General Advertiser, 4th April,
paying a just regard to the illustrious dead, united with the pleasure
of doing good to the living. The letter adds, "To assist industrious
indigence, struggling with distress, and debilitated by age, is a
display of virtue, and an acquisition of happiness and honour. Whoever,
therefore, would be thought capable of pleasure, in reading the works of
our incomparable Milton, and not so destitute of gratitude, as to refuse
to lay out a trifle, in a rational and elegant entertainment, for the
benefit of his living remains, for the exercise of their own virtue, the
increase of their reputation, and the consciousness of doing good,
should appear at Drury lane theatre, to-morrow, April 5, when Comus will
be performed, for the benefit of Mrs. Elizabeth Foster, granddaughter to
the author, and the only surviving branch of his family. _Nota bene_,
there will be a new prologue on the occasion, written by the author of
Irene, and spoken by Mr. Garrick." The man, who had thus exerted himself
to serve the granddaughter, cannot be supposed to have entertained
personal malice to the grandfather. It is true, that the malevolence of
Lauder, as well as the impostures of Archibald Bower, were fully
detected by the labours, in the cause of truth, of the reverend Dr.
Douglas, the late lord bishop of Salisbury,
--"Diram qui contudit Hydram
Notaque fatali portenta labore subegit."
But the pamphlet, entitled, Milton vindicated from the Charge
of Plagiarism brought against him by Mr. Lauder, and Lauder himself
convicted of several forgeries, and gross impositions on the public, by
John Douglas, M.A. rector of Eaton Constantine, Salop, was not published
till the year 1751. In that work, p. 77, Dr. Douglas says, "It is to be
hoped, nay, it is expected, that the elegant and nervous writer, whose
judicious sentiments, and inimitable style, point out the author of
Lauder's preface and postcript, will no longer allow a man to plume
himself with his feathers, who appears so little to have deserved his
assistance; an assistance which, I am persuaded, would never have been
communicated, had there been the least suspicion of those facts, which I
have been the instrument of conveying to the world." We have here a
contemporary testimony to the integrity of Dr. Johnson, throughout the
whole of that vile transaction. What was the consequence of the
requisition made by Dr. Douglas? Johnson, whose ruling passion may be
said to be the love of truth, convinced Lauder, that it would be more
for his interest to make a full confession of his guilt, than to stand
forth the convicted champion of a lie; and, for this purpose, he drew
up, in the strongest terms, a recantation, in a letter to the reverend
Mr. Douglas, which Lauder signed, and published in the year 1751. That
piece will remain a lasting memorial of the abhorrence, with which
Johnson beheld a violation of truth. Mr. Nichols, whose attachment to
his illustrious friend was unwearied, showed him, in 1780, a book,
called Remarks on Johnson's Life of Milton; in which the affair of
Lauder was renewed with virulence; and a poetical scale in the Literary
Magazine, 1758, (when Johnson had ceased to write in that collection,)
was urged as an additional proof of deliberate malice. He read the
libellous passage with attention, and instantly wrote on the margin: "In
the business of Lauder I was deceived, partly by thinking the man too
frantick to be fraudulent. Of the poetical scale, quoted from the
magazine, I am not the author. I fancy it was put in after I had quitted
that work; for I not only did not write it, but I do not remember it."
As a critic and a scholar, Johnson was willing to receive what numbers,
at the time, believed to be true information: when he found that the
whole was a forgery, he renounced all connexion with the author.
In March, 1752, he felt a severe stroke of affliction in the death of
his wife. The last number of the Rambler, as already mentioned, was on
the 14th of that month. The loss of Mrs. Johnson was then approaching,
and, probably, was the cause that put an end to those admirable
periodical essays. It appears that she died on the 28th of March, in a
memorandum, at the foot of the Prayers and Meditations, that is called
her Dying Day. She was buried at Bromley, under the care of Dr.
Hawkesworth. Johnson placed a Latin inscription on her tomb, in which he
celebrated her beauty. With the singularity of his prayers for his
deceased wife, from that time to the end of his days, the world is
sufficiently acquainted. On Easter day, 22nd April, 1764, his memorandum
says: "Thought on Tetty, poor dear Tetty! with my eyes full. Went to
church. After sermon I recommended Tetty in a prayer by herself; and my
father, mother, brother, and Bathurst, in another. I did it only once,
so far as it might be lawful for me." In a prayer, January 23, 1759, the
day on which his mother was buried, he commends, as far as may be
lawful, her soul to God, imploring for her whatever is most beneficial
to her in her present state. In this habit he persevered to the end of
his days. The reverend Mr. Strahan, the editor of the Prayers and
Meditations, observes, "that Johnson, on some occasions, prays that the
Almighty _may have had mercy_ on his wife and Mr. Thrale; evidently
supposing their sentence to have been already passed in the divine mind;
and, by consequence, proving, that he had no belief in a state of
purgatory, and no reason for praying for the dead that could impeach the
sincerity of his profession as a protestant." Mr. Strahan adds, "that,
in praying for the regretted tenants of the grave, Johnson conformed to
a practice which has been retained by many learned members of the
established church, though the liturgy no longer admits it, if _where
the tree, falleth, there it shall be_; if our state, at the close of
life, is to be the measure of our final sentence, then prayers for the
dead, being visibly fruitless, can be regarded only as the vain
oblations of superstition. But of all superstitions this, perhaps, is
one of the least unamiable, and most incident to a good mind. If our
sensations of kindness be intense, those, whom we have revered and
loved, death cannot wholly seclude from our concern. It is true, for the
reason just mentioned, such evidences of our surviving affection may be
thought ill judged; but surely they are generous, and some natural
tenderness is due even to a superstition, which thus originates in piety
and benevolence." These sentences, extracted from the reverend Mr.
Strahan's preface, if they are not a full justification, are, at least,
a beautiful apology. It will not be improper to add what Johnson himself
of purgatory, as believed by the Roman catholicks? his answer was, "It
is a very harmless doctrine. They are of opinion, that the generality of
mankind are neither so obstinately wicked, as to deserve everlasting
punishment; nor so good as to merit being admitted into the society of
blessed spirits; and, therefore, that God is graciously pleased to allow
a middle state, where they may be purified by certain degrees of
suffering. You see there is nothing unreasonable in this; and if it be
once established, that there are souls in purgatory, it is as proper to
pray for them, as for our brethren of mankind, who are yet in this
life." This was Dr. Johnson's guess into futurity; and to guess is the
utmost that man can do:
"Shadows, clouds, and darkness, rest upon it."
Mrs. Johnson left a daughter, Lucy Porter, by her first husband. She had
contracted a friendship with Mrs. Anne Williams, the daughter of Zachary
Williams, a physician of eminence in South Wales, who had devoted more
than thirty years of a long life to the study of the longitude, and was
thought to have made great advances towards that important discovery.
His letters to lord Halifax, and the lords of the admiralty, partly
corrected and partly written by Dr. Johnson, are still extant in the
year of his age, stating, that he had prepared an instrument, which
might be called an epitome or miniature of the terraqueous globe,
showing, with the assistance of tables, constructed by himself, the
variations of the magnetic needle, and ascertaining the longitude, for
the safety of navigation. It appears that this scheme had been referred
to sir Isaac Newton; but that great philosopher excusing himself on
account of his advanced age, all applications were useless, till 1751,
when the subject was referred, by order of lord Anson, to Dr. Bradley,
though it allows that a considerable progress had been made. Dr.
Williams, after all his labour and expense, died in a short time after,
a melancholy instance of unrewarded merit. His daughter possessed
uncommon talents, and, though blind, had an alacrity of mind that made
her conversation agreeable, and even desirable. To relieve and appease
melancholy reflexions, Johnson took her home to his house in Gough
square. In 1755, Garrick gave her a benefit play, which produced two
hundred pounds. In 1766, she published, by subscription, a quarto volume
of miscellanies, and increased her little stock to three hundred pounds.
That fund, with Johnson's protection, supported her, through the
remainder of her life.
During the two years in which the Rambler was carried on, the Dictionary
proceeded by slow degrees. In May, 1752, having composed a prayer,
preparatory to his return from tears and sorrow to the duties of life,
he resumed his grand design, and went on with vigour, giving, however,
occasional assistance to his friend, Dr. Hawkesworth, in the Adventurer,
which began soon after the Rambler was laid aside. Some of the most
valuable essays in that collection were from the pen of Johnson. The
Dictionary was completed towards the end of 1754; and, Cave being then
no more, it was a mortification to the author of that noble addition to
our language, that his old friend did not live to see the triumph of his
labours. In May, 1755, that great work was published. Johnson was
desirous that it should come from one who had obtained academical
honours; and for that purpose his friend, the rev. Thos. Warton,
obtained for him, in the preceding month of February, a diploma for a
master's degree, from the university of Oxford.--Garrick, on the
publication of the Dictionary, wrote the following lines:
"Talk of war with a Briton, he'll boldly advance,
That one English soldier can beat ten of France.
Would we alter the boast, from the sword to the pen,
Our odds are still greater, still greater our men.
In the deep mines of science, though Frenchmen may toil,
Can their strength be compar'd to Locke, Newton, or Boyle?
Let them rally their heroes, send forth all their powers,
Their versemen and prosemen, then match them with ours.
First Shakespeare and Milton, like gods in the fight,
Have put their whole drama and epic to flight.
In satires, epistles, and odes would they cope?
Their numbers retreat before Dryden and Pope.
And Johnson, well arm'd, like a hero of yore,
Has beat forty French, and will beat forty more."
It is, perhaps, needless to mention, that forty was the number of the
French academy, at the time when their dictionary was published to
settle their language.
In the course of the winter, preceding this grand publication, the late
earl of Chesterfield gave two essays in the periodical paper, called The
World, dated November 28, and December 5, 1754, to prepare the public
for so important a work. The original plan, addressed to his lordship in
the year 1747, is there mentioned, in terms of the highest praise; and
this was understood, at the time, to be a courtly way of soliciting a
dedication of the Dictionary to himself. Johnson treated this civility
with disdain. He said to Garrick and others: "I have sailed a long and
painful voyage round the world of the English language; and does he now
send out two cockboats to tow me into harbour?" He had said, in the last
number of the Rambler, "that, having laboured to maintain the dignity of
virtue, I will not now degrade it by the meanness of dedication." Such a
man, when he had finished his Dictionary, "not," as he says himself, "in
the soft obscurities of retirement, or under the shelter of academick
bowers, but amidst inconvenience and distraction, in sickness and in
sorrow, and without the patronage of the great," was not likely to be
caught by the lure, thrown out by lord Chesterfield. He had, in vain,
sought the patronage of that nobleman; and his pride, exasperated by
disappointment, drew from him the following letter, dated in the month
of February, 1755.
MY LORD,--I have been lately informed, by the proprietors of The
World, that two papers, in which my Dictionary is recommended to the
publick, were written by your lordship. To be so distinguished is an
honour which, being very little accustomed to favours from the great,
I know not well how to receive, or in what terms to acknowledge.
When, upon some slight encouragement, I first visited your lordship, I
was overpowered, like the rest of mankind, by the enchantment of your
address, and could not forbear to wish, that I might boast myself "le
vainqueur du vainqueur de la terre;" that I might obtain that regard
for which I saw the world contending. But I found my attendance so
little encouraged, that neither pride nor modesty would suffer me to
continue it. When I had once addressed your lordship in publick, I had
exhausted all the art of pleasing, which a retired and uncourtly
scholar can possess. I had done all that I could; and no man is well
pleased to have his all neglected, be it ever so little.
Seven years, my lord, have now passed, since I waited in your outward
room, or was repulsed from your door; during which time, I have been
pushing on my work through difficulties, of which it is useless to
complain, and have brought it, at last, to the verge of publication,
without one act of assistance, one word of encouragement, or one smile
of favour. Such treatment I did not expect; for I never had a patron
before.
The shepherd in Virgil grew acquainted with love, and found him a
native of the rocks.
Is not a patron, my lord, one who looks with unconcern on a man
struggling for life in the water, and, when he has reached ground,
encumbers him with help? The notice which you have been pleased to
take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind; but it has been
delayed, till I am indifferent, and cannot enjoy it; till I am
solitary, and cannot impart it; till I am known, and do not want it. I
hope it is no very cynical asperity not to confess obligations, where
no benefit has been received; or to be unwilling that the publick
should consider me as owing that to a patron, which providence has
enabled me to do for myself.
Having carried on my work, thus far, with so little obligation to any
favourer of learning, I shall not be disappointed, though I should
conclude it, if less be possible, with less; for I have been long
wakened from that dream of hope, in which I once boasted myself, with
so much exultation,
My lord,
your lordship's most humble
and most obedient servant,
It is said, upon good authority, that Johnson once received from lord
Chesterfield the sum of ten pounds. It were to be wished that the secret
had never transpired. It was mean to receive it, and meaner to give it.
It may be imagined, that for Johnson's ferocity, as it has been called,
there was some foundation in his finances; and, as his Dictionary was
brought to a conclusion, that money was now to flow in upon him. The
reverse was the case. For his subsistence, during the progress of the
work, he had received, at different times, the amount of his contract;
and, when his receipts were produced to him at a tavern dinner, given by
the booksellers, it appeared, that he had been paid a hundred pounds and
written by a Mr. Campbell, a Scotchman, and purser of a man of war,
endeavoured to blast his laurels, but in vain. The world applauded, and
Johnson never replied. "Abuse," he said, "is often of service: there is
nothing so dangerous to an author as silence; his name, like a
or it falls to the ground." Lexiphanes professed to be an imitation of the
pleasant manner of Lucian; but humour was not the talent of the writer of
Lexiphanes. As Dryden says, "he had too much horse-play in his raillery."
It was in the summer, 1754, that the present writer became acquainted
with Dr. Johnson. The cause of his first visit is related by Mrs.
Piozzi, nearly in the following manner:--Mr. Murphy being engaged in a
periodical paper, the Gray's inn Journal, was at a friend's house in the
country, and, not being disposed to lose pleasure for business, wished
to content his bookseller by some unstudied essay. He, therefore, took
up a French Journal Litteraire, and, translating something he liked,
sent it away to town. Time, however, discovered that he translated from
the French, a Rambler, which had been taken from the English, without
acknowledgment. Upon this discovery, Mr. Murphy thought it right to make
his excuses to Dr. Johnson. He went next day, and found him covered with
soot, like a chimney-sweeper, in a little room, as if he had been acting
Lungs, in the Alchemist, "making ether." This being told by Mr. Murphy,
in company, "Come, come," said Dr. Johnson, "the story is black enough;
but it was a happy day that brought you first to my house." After this
first visit, the author of this narrative, by degrees, grew intimate
with Dr. Johnson. The first striking sentence, that he heard from him,
was in a few days after the publication of lord Bolingbroke's posthumous
works. Mr. Garrick asked him, "If he had seen them." "Yes, I have seen
them." "What do you think of them?" "Think of them!" He made a long
pause, and then replied: "Think of them! A scoundrel, and a coward! A
scoundrel, who spent his life in charging a gun against christianity;
and a coward, who was afraid of hearing the report of his own gun; but
left half a crown to a hungry Scotchman to draw the trigger, after his
death." His mind, at this time strained, and over-laboured by constant
exertion, called for an interval of repose and indolence. But indolence
was the time of danger: it was then that his spirits, not employed
abroad, turned with inward hostility against himself. His reflections on
his own life and conduct were always severe; and, wishing to be
immaculate, he destroyed his own peace by unnecessary scruples. He tells
us, that when he surveyed his past life, he discovered nothing but a
barren waste of time, with some disorders of body, and disturbances of
mind, very near to madness. His life, he says, from his earliest years,
was wasted in a morning bed; and his reigning sin was a general
sluggishness, to which he was always inclined, and, in part of his life,
almost compelled, by morbid melancholy, and weariness of mind. This was
his constitutional malady, derived, perhaps, from his father, who was,
at times, overcast with a gloom that bordered on insanity. When to this
it is added, that Johnson, about the age of twenty, drew up a
description of his infirmities, for Dr. Swinfen, at that time an eminent
physician, in Staffordshire; and received an answer to his letter,
importing, that the symptoms indicated a future privation of reason; who
can wonder, that he was troubled with melancholy, and dejection of
spirit? An apprehension of the worst calamity that can befall human
nature hung over him all the rest of his life, like the sword of the
tyrant suspended over his guest. In his sixtieth year he had a mind to
write the history of his melancholy; but he desisted, not knowing
whether it would not too much disturb him. In a Latin poem, however, to
a picture of himself, drawn with as much truth, and as firm a hand, as
can be seen in the portraits of Hogarth, or sir Joshua Reynolds. The
learned reader will find the original poem in this volume; and it is
hoped, that a translation, or rather imitation, of so curious a piece,
will not be improper in this place.
When Scaliger, whole years of labour past,
Beheld his lexicon complete at last,
And weary of his task, with wond'ring eyes,
Saw, from words pil'd on words, a fabric rise,
He curs'd the industry, inertly strong,
In creeping toil that could persist so long;
And if, enrag'd he cried, heav'n meant to shed
Its keenest vengeance on the guilty head,
The drudgery of words the damn'd would know,
Yes, you had cause, great genius, to repent;
"You lost good days, that might be better spent;"
You well might grudge the hours of ling'ring pain,
And view your learned labours with disdain.
To you were given the large expanded mind,
The flame of genius, and the taste refin'd.
'Twas yours, on eagle wings, aloft to soar,
And, amidst rolling worlds, the great first cause explore,
To fix the aeras of recorded time,
And live in ev'ry age and ev'ry clime;
Record the chiefs, who propt their country's cause;
Who founded empires, and establish'd laws;
To learn whate'er the sage, with virtue fraught,
Whate'er the muse of moral wisdom taught.
These were your quarry; these to you were known,
And the world's ample volume was your own.
Yet, warn'd by me, ye pigmy wits, beware,
Nor with immortal Scaliger compare.
For me, though his example strike my view,
Oh! not for me his footsteps to pursue.
Whether first nature, unpropitious, cold,
This clay compounded in a ruder mould;
Or the slow current, loit'ring at my heart,
No gleam of wit or fancy can impart;
Whate'er the cause, from me no numbers flow,
No visions warm me, and no raptures glow.
A mind like Scaliger's, superior still,
No grief could conquer, no misfortune chill.
Though, for the maze of words, his native skies
He seem'd to quit, 'twas but again to rise;
To mount, once more, to the bright source of day,
And view the wonders of th' ethereal way.
The love of fame his gen'rous bosom fir'd;
Each science hail'd him, and each muse inspir'd.
For him the sons of learning trimm'd the bays,
And nations grew harmonious in his praise.
My task perform'd, and all my labours o'er,
For me what lot has fortune now in store?
The listless will succeeds, that worst disease,
The rack of indolence, the sluggish ease.
Care grows on care, and o'er my aching brain
Black melancholy pours her morbid train.
No kind relief, no lenitive at hand,
I seek, at midnight clubs, the social band;
But midnight clubs, where wit with noise conspires,
Where Comus revels, and where wine inspires,
Delight no more: I seek my lonely bed,
And call on sleep to sooth my languid head.
But sleep from these sad lids flies far away;
I mourn all night, and dread the coming day.
Exhausted, tir'd, I throw my eyes around,
To find some vacant spot on classic ground;
And soon, vain hope! I form a grand design;
Languor succeeds, and all my pow'rs decline.
If science open not her richest vein,
Without materials all our toil is vain.
A form to rugged stone when Phidias gives--
Beneath his touch a new creation lives.
Remove his marble, and his genius dies:
With nature then no breathing statue vies.
Whate'er I plan, I feel my pow'rs confin'd
By fortune's frown, and penury of mind.
I boast no knowledge, glean'd with toil and strife,
That bright reward of a well acted life.
I view myself, while reason's feeble light
Shoots a pale glimmer through the gloom of night;
While passions, error, phantoms of the brain,
And vain opinions, fill the dark domain;
A dreary void, where fears, with grief combin'd,
Waste all within, and desolate the mind.
What then remains? Must I, in slow decline,
To mute inglorious ease old age resign?
Or, bold ambition kindling in my breast,
Attempt some arduous task? Or, were it best,
Brooding o'er lexicons to pass the day,
And in that labour drudge my life away?
Such is the picture for which Dr. Johnson sat to himself. He gives the
prominent features of his character; his lassitude, his morbid
melancholy, his love of fame, his dejection, his tavern-parties, and his
wandering reveries, "Vacuae mala somnia mentis," about which so much has
been written; all are painted in miniature, but in vivid colours, by his
own hand. His idea of writing more dictionaries was not merely said in
verse. Mr. Hamilton, who was at that time an eminent printer, and well
acquainted with Dr. Johnson, remembers that he engaged in a Commercial
Dictionary, and, as appears by the receipts in his possession, was paid
his price for several sheets; but he soon relinquished the undertaking.
It is probable, that he found himself not sufficiently versed in that
branch of knowledge.
He was again reduced to the expedient of short compositions, for the
supply of the day. The writer of this narrative has now before him a
letter, in Dr. Johnson's handwriting, which shows the distress and
melancholy situation of the man, who had written the Rambler, and
finished the great work of his Dictionary. The letter is directed to Mr.
Richardson, the author of Clarissa, and is as follows:
"SIR,--I am obliged to entreat your assistance. I am now under an
arrest for five pounds eighteen shillings. Mr. Strahan, from whom I
should have received the necessary help in this case, is not at home;
and I am afraid of not finding Mr. Millar. If you will be so good as
to send me this sum, I will very gratefully repay you, and add it to
all former obligations. I am, sir,
Your most obedient,
and most humble servant,
Gough square, 16 March."
In the margin of this letter, there is a memorandum in these words:
"March 16, 1756, sent six guineas. Witness, Wm. Richardson." For the
honour of an admired writer it is to be regretted, that we do not find a
more liberal entry. To his friend, in distress, he sent eight shillings
more than was wanted. Had an incident of this kind occurred in one of
his romances, Richardson would have known how to grace his hero; but in
fictitious scenes, generosity costs the writer nothing.
About this time Johnson contributed several papers to a periodical
miscellany, called The Visiter, from motives which are highly honourable
to him, a compassionate regard for the late Mr. Christopher Smart. The
criticism on Pope's epitaphs appeared in that work. In a short time
after, he became a reviewer in the Literary magazine, under the auspices
of the late Mr. Newbery, a man of a projecting head, good taste, and
great industry. This employment engrossed but little of Johnson's time.
He resigned himself to indolence, took no exercise, rose about two, and
then received the visits of his friends. Authors, long since forgotten,
waited on him, as their oracle, and he gave responses in the chair of
criticism. He listened to the complaints, the schemes, and the hopes and
fears of a crowd of inferior writers, "who," he said, in the words of
Roger Ascham, "lived _men knew not how, and died obscure, men marked not
when_." He believed, that he could give a better history of Grub street
than any man living. His house was filled with a succession of visitors
till four or five in the evening. During the whole time he presided at
his tea-table. Tea was his favourite beverage; and, when the late Jonas
Hanway pronounced his anathema against the use of tea, Johnson rose in
defence of his habitual practice, declaring himself "in that article, a
hardened sinner, who had for years diluted his meals with the infusion
of that fascinating plant; whose tea-kettle had no time to cool; who,
with tea, solaced the midnight hour, and with tea welcomed the morning."
The proposal for a new edition of Shakespeare, which had formerly
miscarried, was resumed in the year 1756. The booksellers readily agreed
to his terms: and subscription-tickets were issued out. For undertaking
this work, money, he confessed, was the inciting motive. His friends
exerted themselves to promote his interest; and, in the mean time, he
engaged in a new periodical production, called The Idler. The first
number appeared on Saturday, April 15, 1758 and the last, April 5, 1760.
The profits of this work, and the subscriptions for the new edition of
Shakespeare, were the means by which he supported himself for four or
five years. In 1759, was published Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia. His
translation of Lobo's Voyage to Abissinia, seems to have pointed out
that country for the scene of action; and Rassela Christos, the general
of sultan Sequed, mentioned in that work, most probably suggested the
name of the prince. The author wanted to set out on a journey to
Lichfield, in order to pay the last offices of filial piety to his
mother, who, at the age of ninety, was then near her dissolution; but
money was necessary. Mr. Johnston, a bookseller, who has, long since,
left off business, gave one hundred pounds for the copy. With this
supply Johnson set out for Lichfield; but did not arrive in time to
close the eyes of a parent whom he loved. He attended the funeral,
which, as appears among his memorandums, was on the 23rd of January,
Johnson now found it necessary to retrench his expenses. He gave up his
house in Gough square. Mrs. Williams went into lodgings. He retired to
Gray's inn, and soon removed to chambers in the Inner Temple lane, where
he lived in poverty, total idleness, and the pride of literature: "Magni
stat nominis umbra." Mr. Fitzherbert, the father of lord St. Helens, the
present minister at Madrid, a man distinguished, through life, for his
benevolence and other amiable qualities, used to say, that he paid a
morning visit to Johnson, intending, from his chambers, to send a letter
into the city; but, to his great surprise, he found an author by
profession, without pen, ink, or paper. The present bishop of Salisbury
was also among those who endeavoured, by constant attention, to sooth
the cares of a mind, which he knew to be afflicted with gloomy
apprehensions. At one of the parties made at his house, Boscovich, the
jesuit, who had then lately introduced the Newtonian philosophy at Rome,
and, after publishing an elegant Latin poem on the subject, was made a
fellow of the Royal Society, was one of the company invited to meet Dr.
Johnson. The conversation, at first, was mostly in French. Johnson,
though thoroughly versed in that language, and a professed admirer of
Boileau and La Bruyere, did not understand its pronunciation, nor
could he speak it himself with propriety. For the rest of the evening
the talk was in Latin. Boscovich had a ready current flow of that flimsy
phraseology, with which a priest may travel through Italy, Spain, and
Germany. Johnson scorned what he called colloquial barbarisms. It was
his pride to speak his best. He went on, after a little practice, with
as much facility as if it was his native tongue. One sentence this
writer well remembers. Observing that Fontenelle, at first, opposed the
Newtonian philosophy, and embraced it afterwards, his words were:
"Fontinellus, ni fallor, in extrema senectute, fuit transfuga ad castra
Newtoniana."
We have now travelled through that part of Dr. Johnson's life, which was
a perpetual struggle with difficulties. Halcyon days are now to open
upon him. In the month of May, 1762, his majesty, to reward literary
merit, signified his pleasure to grant to Johnson a pension of three
hundred pounds a year. The earl of Bute was minister. Lord Loughborough,
who, perhaps, was originally a mover in the business, had authority to
mention it. He was well acquainted with Johnson; but, having heard much
of his independent spirit, and of the downfal of Osborne, the
bookseller, he did not know but his benevolence might be rewarded with a
folio on his head. He desired the author of these memoirs to undertake
the task. This writer thought the opportunity of doing so much good the
most happy incident in his life. He went, without delay, to the
chambers, in the Inner Temple lane, which, in fact, were the abode of
wretchedness. By slow and studied approaches the message was disclosed.
Johnson made a long pause: he asked if it was seriously intended: he
fell into a profound meditation, and his own definition of a pensioner
occurred to him. He was told, "that he, at least, did not come within
the definition." He desired to meet next day, and dine at the Mitre
tavern. At that meeting he gave up all his scruples. On the following
day, lord Loughborough conducted him to the earl of Bute. The
conversation that passed, was, in the evening, related to this writer,
by Dr. Johnson. He expressed his sense of his majesty's bounty, and
thought himself the more highly honoured, as the favour was not bestowed
on him for having dipped his pen in faction. "No, sir," said lord Bute,
"it is not offered to you for having dipped your pen in faction, nor
with a design that you ever should." Sir John Hawkins will have it,
that, after this interview, Johnson was often pressed to wait on lord
Bute, but with a sullen spirit refused to comply. However that be,
Johnson was never heard to utter a disrespectful word of that nobleman.
The writer of this essay remembers a circumstance, which may throw some
light on this subject. The late Dr. Rose, of Chiswick, whom Johnson
loved and respected, contended for the pre-eminence of the Scotch
writers; and Ferguson's book on Civil Society, then on the eve of
publication, he said, would give the laurel to North Britain. "Alas!
what can he do upon that subject?" said Johnson: "Aristotle, Polybius,
Grotius, Puffendorf, and Burlemaqui, have reaped in that field before
him." "He will treat it," said Dr. Rose, "in a new manner." "A new
manner! Buckinger had no hands, and he wrote his name with his toes, at
Charing Cross, for half a crown a piece; that was a new manner of
writing!" Dr. Rose replied: "If that will not satisfy you, I will name a
writer, whom you must allow to be the best in the kingdom." "Who is
that?" "The earl of Bute, when he wrote an order for your pension."
"There, sir," said Johnson, "you have me in the toil: to lord Bute I
must allow whatever praise you claim for him." Ingratitude was no part
of Johnson's character.
Being now in the possession of a regular income, Johnson left his
chambers in the temple, and, once more, became master of a house in
Johnson's court, Fleet street. Dr. Levet, his friend and physician in
morning, talked what he had to say, and did not expect an answer. Mrs.
Williams had her apartment in the house, and entertained her benefactor
with more enlarged conversation. Chymistry was a part of Johnson's
amusement. For this love of experimental philosophy, sir John Hawkins
thinks an apology necessary. He tells us, with great gravity, that
curiosity was the only object in view; not an intention to grow suddenly
rich by the philosopher's stone, or the transmutation of metals. To
enlarge this circle, Johnson, once more, had recourse to a literary
club. This was at the Turk's head, in Gerard street, Soho, on every
Tuesday evening through the year. The members were, besides himself, the
right honourable Edmund Burke, sir Joshua Reynolds, Dr. Nugent, Dr.
Goldsmith, the late Mr. Topham Beauclerc, Mr. Langton, Mr. Chamier, sir
J. Hawkins, and some others. Johnson's affection for sir Joshua was
founded on a long acquaintance, and a thorough knowledge of the virtuous
and amiable qualities of that excellent artist. He delighted in the
conversation of Mr. Burke. He met him, for the first time, at Mr.
Garrick's, several years ago. On the next day he said: "I suppose,
Murphy, you are proud of your countryman: 'Cum talis sit, utinam noster
esset!'" From that time, his constant observation was, "that a man of
sense could not meet Mr. Burke, by accident, under a gateway, to avoid a
shower, without being convinced, that he was the first man in England."
Johnson felt not only kindness, but zeal and ardour for his friends. He
did every thing in his power to advance the reputation of Dr. Goldsmith.
He loved him, though he knew his failings, and particularly the leaven
of envy, which corroded the mind of that elegant writer, and made him
impatient, without disguise, of the praises bestowed on any person
whatever. Of this infirmity, which marked Goldsmith's character, Johnson
gave a remarkable instance. It happened that he went with sir Joshua
Reynolds and Goldsmith, to see the fantoccini, which were exhibited,
some years ago, in or near the Haymarket. They admired the curious
mechanism by which the puppets were made to walk the stage, draw a chair
to the table, sit down, write a letter, and perform a variety of other
actions, with such dexterity, that "though nature's journeymen made the
men, they imitated humanity," to the astonishment of the spectator. The
entertainment being over, the three friends retired to a tavern. Johnson
and sir Joshua talked with pleasure of what they had seen; and, says
Johnson, in a tone of admiration: "How the little fellow brandished his
spontoon!" "There is nothing in it," replied Goldsmith, starting up with
impatience, "give me a spontoon; I can do it as well myself."
Enjoying his amusements at his weekly club, and happy in a state of
independence, Johnson gained, in the year 1765, another resource, which
contributed, more than any thing else, to exempt him from the
solicitudes of life. He was introduced to the late Mr. Thrale and his
family. Mrs. Piozzi has related the fact, and it is, therefore, needless
to repeat it in this place. The author of this narrative looks back to
the share he had in that business, with self-congratulation, since he
knows the tenderness which, from that time, soothed Johnson's cares at
Streatham, and prolonged a valuable life. The subscribers to Shakespeare
began to despair of ever seeing the promised edition. To acquit himself
of this obligation, he went to work unwillingly, but proceeded with
vigour. In the month of October, 1765, Shakespeare was published; and,
in a short time after, the university of Dublin sent over a diploma, in
honourable terms, creating him a doctor of laws. Oxford, in eight or ten
years afterwards, followed the example; and, till then, Johnson never
assumed the title of doctor. In 1766, his constitution seemed to be in a
rapid decline; and that morbid melancholy, which often clouded his
understanding, came upon him with a deeper gloom than ever. Mr. and Mrs.
Thrale paid him a visit in this situation, and found him on his knees,
with Dr. Delap, the rector of Lewes, in Sussex, beseeching God to
continue to him the use of his understanding. Mr. Thrale took him to his
house at Streatham, and Johnson, from that time, became a constant
resident in the family. He went, occasionally, to the club in Gerard
street, but his headquarters were fixed at Streatham. An apartment was
fitted up for him, and the library was greatly enlarged. Parties were
constantly invited from town; and Johnson was every day at an elegant
table, with select and polished company. Whatever could be devised by
Mr. and Mrs. Thrale to promote the happiness, and establish the health
of their guest, was studiously performed from that time to the end of
Mr. Thrale's life. Johnson accompanied the family, in all their summer
excursions, to Brighthelmstone, to Wales, and to Paris. It is but
justice to Mr. Thrale to say, that a more ingenuous frame of mind no man
possessed. His education at Oxford gave him the habits of a gentleman;
his amiable temper recommended his conversation; and the goodness of his
heart made him a sincere friend. That he was the patron of Johnson, is
an honour to his memory.
In petty disputes with contemporary writers, or the wits of the age,
Johnson was seldom entangled. A single incident of that kind may not be
unworthy of notice, since it happened with a man of great celebrity in
his time. A number of friends dined with Garrick on a Christmas day.
Foote was then in Ireland. It was said, at table, that the modern
Aristophanes (so Foote was called) had been horsewhipped by a Dublin
apothecary, for mimicking him on the stage. "I wonder," said Garrick,
"that any man should show so much resentment to Foote; he has a patent
for such liberties; nobody ever thought it worth his while to quarrel
with him in London." "I am glad," said Johnson, "to find that the man is
rising in the world." The expression was afterwards repeated to Foote,
who, in return, gave out, that he would produce the Caliban of
literature on the stage. Being informed of this design, Johnson sent
word to Foote: "that the theatre being intended for the reformation of
vice, he would step from the boxes on the stage, and correct him before
the audience." Foote knew the intrepidity of his antagonist, and
abandoned the design. No ill will ensued. Johnson used to say: "that for
broad-faced mirth, Foote had not his equal."
Dr. Johnson's fame excited the curiosity of the king. His majesty
expressed a desire to see a man of whom extraordinary things were said.
Accordingly, the librarian at Buckingham house invited Johnson to see
that elegant collection of books, at the same time giving a hint of what
was intended. His majesty entered the room, and, among other things,
asked the author, "if he meant to give the world any more of his
compositions." Johnson answered: "that he thought he had written
enough." "And I should think so too," replied his majesty, "if you had
not written so well."
Though Johnson thought he had written enough, his genius, even in spite
of bodily sluggishness, could not lie still. In 1770 we find him
entering the lists, as a political writer. The flame of discord that
blazed throughout the nation, on the expulsion of Mr. Wilkes, and the
final determination of the house of commons, that Mr. Luttrell was duly
elected by two hundred and six votes, against eleven hundred and
forty-three, spread a general spirit of discontent. To allay the tumult,
Dr. Johnson published the False Alarm. Mrs. Piozzi informs us, "that this
pamphlet was written at her house, between eight o'clock on Wednesday
night and twelve on Thursday night." This celerity has appeared
wonderful to many, and some have doubted the truth. It may, however, be
placed within the bounds of probability. Johnson has observed, that
there are different methods of composition. Virgil was used to pour out
a great number of verses in the morning, and pass the day in retrenching
the exuberances, and correcting inaccuracies; and it was Pope's custom
to write his first thoughts in his first words, and gradually to
amplify, decorate, rectify, and refine them. Others employ, at once,
memory and invention, and, with little intermediate use of the pen, form
and polish large masses by continued meditation, and write their
productions only, when, in their opinion, they have completed them. This
last was Johnson's method. He never took his pen in hand till he had
well weighed his subject, and grasped, in his mind, the sentiments, the
train of argument, and the arrangement of the whole. As he often thought
aloud, he had, perhaps, talked it over to himself. This may account for
that rapidity with which, in general, he despatched his sheets to the
press, without being at the trouble of a fair copy. Whatever may be the
logic or eloquence of the False Alarm, the house of commons have since
erased the resolution from the journals. But whether they have not left
materials for a future controversy may be made a question.
In 1771, he published another tract, on the subject of Falkland islands.
The design was to show the impropriety of going to war with Spain for an
island, thrown aside from human use, stormy in winter, and barren in
summer. For this work it is apparent, that materials were furnished by
direction of the minister.
At the approach of the general election in 1774, he wrote a short
discourse, called The Patriot, not with any visible application to Mr.
Wilkes; but to teach the people to reject the leaders of opposition, who
called themselves patriots. In 1775, he undertook a pamphlet of more
importance, namely, Taxation no Tyranny, in answer to the Resolutions
and Address of the American congress. The scope of the argument was,
that distant colonies, which had, in their assemblies, a legislature of
their own, were, notwithstanding, liable to be taxed in a British
parliament, where they had neither peers in one house, nor
representatives in the other. He was of opinion, that this country was
strong enough to enforce obedience. "When an Englishman," he says, "is
told that the Americans shoot up like the hydra, he naturally considers
how the hydra was destroyed." The event has shown how much he and the
minister of that day were mistaken.
The account of the Tour to the Western Islands of Scotland, which was
undertaken in the autumn of 1773, in company with Mr. Boswell, was not
published till some time in the year 1775. This book has been variously
received; by some extolled for the elegance of the narrative, and the
depth of observation on life and manners; by others, as much condemned,
as a work of avowed hostility to the Scotch nation. The praise was,
beyond all question, fairly deserved; and the censure, on due
examination, will appear hasty and ill founded. That Johnson entertained
some prejudices against the Scotch must not be dissembled. It is true,
as Mr. Boswell says, "that he thought their success in England exceeded
their proportion of real merit, and he could not but see in them that
nationality which no liberal-minded Scotsman will deny." The author of
these memoirs well remembers, that Johnson one day asked him, "have you
observed the difference between your own country impudence and Scotch
impudence?" The answer being in the negative: "then I will tell you,"
said Johnson. "The impudence of an Irishman is the impudence of a fly,
that buzzes about you, and you put it away, but it returns again, and
flutters and teases you. The impudence of a Scotsman is the impudence of
a leech, that fixes and sucks your blood." Upon another occasion, this
writer went with him into the shop of Davies, the bookseller, in Russell
street, Covent garden. Davies came running to him, almost out of breath
with joy: "The Scots gentleman is come, sir; his principal wish is to
see you; he is now in the back parlour." "Well, well, I'll see the
gentleman," said Johnson. He walked towards the room. Mr. Boswell was
the person. This writer followed, with no small curiosity. "I find,"
said Mr. Boswell, "that I am come to London, at a bad time, when great
popular prejudice has gone forth against us North Britons; but, when I
am talking to you, I am talking to a large and liberal mind, and you
know that I cannot help coming from Scotland." "Sir," said Johnson, "no
He had other reasons that helped to alienate him from the natives of
Scotland. Being a cordial well-wisher to the constitution in church and
state, he did not think that Calvin and John Knox were proper founders
of a national religion. He made, however, a wide distinction between the
dissenters of Scotland and the separatists of England. To the former he
imputed no disaffection, no want of loyalty. Their soldiers and their
officers had shed their blood with zeal and courage in the service of
great Britain; and the people, he used to say, were content with their
own established modes of worship, without wishing, in the present age,
to give any disturbance to the church of England.
This he was, at all times, ready to admit; and, therefore, declared,
that, whenever he found a Scotchman, to whom an Englishman was as a
Scotchman, that Scotchman should be as an Englishman to him. In this,
surely, there was no rancour, no malevolence. The dissenters, on this
side the Tweed, appeared to him in a different light. Their religion, he
frequently said, was too worldly, too political, too restless and
ambitious. The doctrine of cashiering kings, and erecting, on the ruins
of the constitution, a new form of government, which lately issued from
their pulpits, he always thought was, under a calm disguise, the
principle that lay lurking in their hearts. He knew, that a wild
democracy had overturned kings, lords, and commons; and that a set of
republican fanatics, who would not bow at the name of Jesus, had taken
possession of all the livings, and all the parishes in the kingdom. That
those scenes of horror might never be renewed, was the ardent wish of
Dr. Johnson; and, though he apprehended no danger from Scotland, it is
probable, that his dislike of calvinism mingled, sometimes, with his
reflections on the natives of that country. The association of ideas
could not be easily broken; but it is well known, that he loved and
respected many gentlemen from that part of the island. Dr. Robertson's
History of Scotland, and Dr. Beattie's Essays, were subjects of his
constant praise. Mr. Boswell, Dr. Rose, of Chiswick, Andrew Millar, Mr.
Hamilton, the printer, and the late Mr. Strahan, were among his most
intimate friends. Many others might be added to the list. He scorned to
enter Scotland as a spy; though Hawkins, his biographer, and the
professing defender of his fame, allowed himself leave to represent him
in that ignoble character. He went into Scotland to survey men and
manners. Antiquities, fossils, and minerals, were not within his
province. He did not visit that country to settle the station of Roman
camps, or the spot, where Galgacus fought the last battle for public
liberty. The people, their customs, and the progress of literature, were
his objects. The civilities which he received in the course of his tour,
have been repaid with grateful acknowledgment, and, generally, with
great elegance of expression. His crime is, that he found the country
bare of trees, and he has stated the fact. This, Mr. Boswell, in his
tour to the Hebrides, has told us, was resented, by his countrymen, with
anger inflamed to rancour; but he admits that there are few trees on the
east side of Scotland. Mr. Pennant, in his tour, says, that, in some
parts of the eastern side of the country, he saw several large
plantations of pine, planted by gentlemen near their seats; and, in this
respect, such a laudable spirit prevails, that, in another half-century,
it never shall be said, "To spy the nakedness of the land are you come."
Johnson could not wait for that half-century, and, therefore, mentioned
things as he found them. If, in any thing, he has been mistaken, he has
made a fair apology, in the last paragraph of his book, avowing with
candour: "That he may have been surprised by modes of life, and
appearances of nature, that are familiar to men of wider survey, and
more varied conversation. Novelty and ignorance must always be
reciprocal: and he is conscious that his thoughts on national manners,
are the thoughts of one who has seen but little."
The poems of Ossian made a part of Johnson's inquiry, during his
residence in Scotland and the Hebrides. On his return to England,
November, 1773, a storm seemed to be gathering over his head; but the
cloud never burst, and the thunder never fell.--Ossian, it is well
known, was presented to the public, as a translation from the Erse; but
that this was a fraud, Johnson declared, without hesitation. "The Erse,"
he says, "was always oral only, and never a written language. The Welsh
and the Irish were more cultivated. In Erse, there was not in the world
a single manuscript a hundred years old. Martin, who, in the last
century, published an account of the Western Islands, mentions Irish,
but never Erse manuscripts, to be found in the islands in his time. The
bards could not read; if they could, they might, probably, have written.
But the bard was a barbarian among barbarians, and, knowing nothing
himself, lived with others that knew no more. If there is a manuscript
from which the translation was made, in what age was it written, and
where is it? If it was collected from oral recitation, it could only be
in detached parts, and scattered fragments: the whole is too long to be
remembered. Who put it together in its present form?" For these, and
such like reasons, Johnson calls the whole an imposture. He adds, "The
editor, or author, never could show the original, nor can it be shown by
any other. To revenge reasonable incredulity, by refusing evidence, is a
degree of insolence with which the world is not yet acquainted; and
stubborn audacity is the last refuge of guilt." This reasoning carries
with it great weight. It roused the resentment of Mr. Macpherson. He
sent a threatening letter to the author; and Johnson answered him in the
rough phrase of stern defiance. The two heroes frowned at a distance,
but never came to action.
In the year 1777, the misfortunes of Dr. Dodd excited his compassion. He
wrote a speech for that unhappy man, when called up to receive judgment
of death; besides two petitions, one to the king, and another to the
queen; and a sermon to be preached by Dodd to the convicts in Newgate.
It may appear trifling to add, that, about the same time, he wrote a
prologue to the comedy of a Word to the Wise, written by Hugh Kelly. The
play, some years before, had been damned by a party on the first night.
It was revived for the benefit of the author's widow. Mrs. Piozzi
relates, that when Johnson was rallied for these exertions, so close to
one another, his answer was, "When they come to me with a dying parson,
and a dead stay-maker, what can a man do?"
We come now to the last of his literary labours. At the request of the
booksellers, he undertook the Lives of the Poets. The first publication
was in 1779, and the whole was completed in 1781. In a memorandum of
that year, he says, some time in March he finished the Lives of the
Poets, which he wrote in his usual way, dilatorily and hastily,
unwilling to work, yet working with vigour and haste. In another place,
he hopes they are written in such a manner, as may tend to the promotion
of piety. That the history of so many men, who, in their different
degrees, made themselves conspicuous in their time, was not written
recently after their deaths, seems to be an omission that does no honour
to the republic of letters. Their contemporaries, in general, looked on
with calm indifference, and suffered wit and genius to vanish out of the
world in total silence, unregarded and unlamented. Was there no friend
to pay the tribute of a tear? No just observer of life to record the
virtues of the deceased? Was even envy silent? It seemed to have been
agreed, that if an author's works survived, the history of the man was
to give no moral lesson to after-ages. If tradition told us that Ben
Jonson went to the Devil tavern; that Shakespeare stole deer, and held
the stirrup at play-house doors; that Dryden frequented Button's
coffee-house; curiosity was lulled asleep, and biography forgot the best
part of her function, which is, to instruct mankind by examples taken from
the school of life. This task remained for Dr. Johnson, when years had
rolled away; when the channels of information were, for the most part,
choked up, and little remained besides doubtful anecdote, uncertain
tradition, and vague report.
"Nunc situs informis premit et deserta vetustas."
The value of biography has been better understood in other ages, and in
other countries. Tacitus informs us, that to record the lives and
characters of illustrious men, was the practice of the Roman authors, in
the early periods of the republic. In France, the example has been
followed. Fontenelle, D'Alembert, and monsieur Thomas, have left models
in this kind of composition. They have embalmed the dead. But it is
true, that they had incitements and advantages, even at a distant day,
which could not, by any diligence, be obtained by Dr. Johnson. The wits
of France had ample materials. They lived in a nation of critics, who
had, at heart, the honour done to their country by their poets, their
heroes, and their philosophers. They had, besides, an academy of
belles-lettres, where genius was cultivated, refined, and encouraged.
They had the tracts, the essays, and dissertations, which remain in the
memoirs of the academy, and they had the speeches of the several members,
delivered at their first admission to a seat in that learned assembly.
In those speeches the new academician did ample justice to the memory of
his predecessor; and though his harangue was decorated with the colours
of eloquence, and was, for that reason, called panegyric, yet, being
pronounced before qualified judges, who knew the talents, the conduct,
and morals of the deceased, the speaker could not, with propriety,
wander into the regions of fiction. The truth was known, before it was
adorned. The academy saw the marble before the artist polished it. But
this country has had no academy of literature. The public mind, for
centuries, has been engrossed by party and faction; "by the madness of
many for the gain of a few;" by civil wars, religious dissensions, trade
and commerce, and the arts of accumulating wealth. Amidst such
attentions, who can wonder that cold praise has been often the only
reward of merit? In this country, Dr. Nathaniel Hodges, who, like the
good bishop of Marseilles, drew purer breath amidst the contagion of the
plague in London, and, during the whole time, continued in the city,
administering medical assistance, was suffered, as Johnson used to
relate, with tears in his eyes, to die for debt, in a gaol. In this
country, the man who brought the New river to London, was ruined by that
noble project; and, in this country, Otway died for want, on Tower hill;
Butler, the great author of Hudibras, whose name can only die with the
English language, was left to languish in poverty; the particulars of
his life almost unknown, and scarce a vestige of him left, except his
immortal poem. Had there been an academy of literature, the lives, at
least, of those celebrated persons, would have been written for the
benefit of posterity. Swift, it seems, had the idea of such an
institution, and proposed it to lord Oxford; but whig and tory were more
important objects. It is needless to dissemble, that Dr. Johnson, in the
life of Roscommon, talks of the inutility of such a project. "In this
country," he says, "an academy could be expected to do but little. If an
academician's place were profitable, it would be given by interest; if
attendance were gratuitous, it would be rarely paid, and no man would
endure the least disgust. Unanimity is impossible, and debate would
separate the assembly." To this it may be sufficient to answer, that the
Royal society has not been dissolved by sullen disgust; and the modern
academy, at Somerset house, has already performed much, and promises
more. Unanimity is not necessary to such an assembly. On the contrary,
by difference of opinion, and collision of sentiment, the cause of
literature would thrive and flourish. The true principles of criticism,
the secret of fine writing, the investigation of antiquities, and other
interesting subjects, might occasion a clash of opinions; but, in that
contention, truth would receive illustration, and the essays of the
several members would supply the memoirs of the academy. "But," says Dr.
Johnson, "suppose the philological decree made and promulgated, what
would be its authority? In absolute government there is, sometimes, a
general reverence paid to all that has the sanction of power the
countenance of greatness.--How little this is the state of our country,
needs not to be told. The edicts of an English academy would, probably,
be read by many, only that they may be sure to disobey them. The present
manners of the nation would deride authority, and, therefore, nothing is
left, but that every writer should criticise himself." This, surely, is
not conclusive. It is by the standard of the best writers, that every
man settles, for himself, his plan of legitimate composition; and since
the authority of superior genius is acknowledged, that authority, which
the individual obtains, would not be lessened by an association with
others of distinguished ability. It may, therefore, be inferred, that an
academy of literature would be an establishment highly useful, and an
honour to literature. In such an institution, profitable places would
not be wanted. "Vatis avarus haud facile est animus;" and the minister,
who shall find leisure, from party and faction, to carry such a scheme
into execution, will, in all probability, be respected by posterity, as
the Maecenas of letters.
We now take leave of Dr. Johnson, as an author. Four volumes of his
Lives of the Poets were published in 1778, and the work was completed in
a Johnson to look back through a century, and give a body of critical
and moral instruction. In April, 1781, he lost his friend Mr. Thrale.
His own words, in his diary, will best tell that melancholy event. "On
Wednesday, the 11th of April, was buried my dear friend Mr. Thrale, who
died on Wednesday, the 4th, and with him were buried many of my hopes
and pleasures. About five, I think, on Wednesday morning, he expired. I
felt almost the last flutter of his pulse, and looked, for the last
time, upon the face, that, for fifteen years before, had never been
turned upon me but with respect and benignity. Farewell: may God, that
delighteth in mercy, have had mercy on thee! I had constantly prayed for
him before his death. The decease of him, from whose friendship I had
obtained many opportunities of amusement, and to whom I turned my
thoughts, as to a refuge from misfortunes, has left me heavy. But my
business is with myself."--From the close of his last work, the malady
that persecuted him through life came upon him with alarming severity,
and his constitution declined apace. In 1782, his old friend, Levet,
expired, without warning and without a groan. Events like these reminded
Johnson of his own mortality. He continued his visits to Mrs. Thrale, at
Streatham, to the 7th day of October, 1782, when, having first composed
a prayer for the happiness of a family, with whom he had, for many
years, enjoyed the pleasures and comforts of life, he removed to his own
house in town. He says he was up early in the morning, and read
fortuitously in the Gospel, "which was his parting use of the library."
The merit of the family is manifested by the sense he had of it, and we
see his heart overflowing with gratitude. He leaves the place with
regret, and "casts a lingering look behind."
The few remaining occurrences may be soon despatched. In the month of
June, 1783, Johnson had a paralytic stroke, which affected his speech
only. He wrote to Dr. Taylor, of Westminster; and to his friend Mr.
Allen, the printer, who lived at the next door. Dr. Brocklesby arrived
in a short time, and by his care, and that of Dr. Heberden, Johnson soon
recovered. During his illness, the writer of this narrative visited him,
and found him reading Dr. Watson's Chymistry. Articulating with
difficulty, he said, "From this book, he who knows nothing may learn a
great deal; and he who knows, will be pleased to find his knowledge
recalled to his mind in a manner highly pleasing." In the month of
August he set out for Lichfield, on a visit to Mrs. Lucy Porter, the
daughter of his wife by her first husband; and, in his way back, paid
his respects to Dr. Adams, at Oxford. Mrs. Williams died, at his house
in Bolt court, in the month of September, during his absence. This was
another shock to a mind like his, ever agitated by the thoughts of
futurity. The contemplation of his own approaching end was constantly
before his eyes; and the prospect of death, he declared, was terrible.
For many years, when he was not disposed to enter into the conversation
going forward, whoever sat near his chair, might hear him repeating,
from Shakespeare,
"Aye, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod, and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods"--
And from Milton,
--"Who would lose,
For fear of pain, this intellectual being?"
By the death of Mrs. Williams he was left in a state of destitution,
with nobody but Frank, his black servant, to sooth his anxious moments.
In November, 1783, he was swelled from head to foot with a dropsy. Dr.
Brocklesby, with that benevolence with which he always assists his
friends, paid his visits with assiduity. The medicines prescribed were
so efficacious, that, in a few days, Johnson, while he was offering up
his prayers, was suddenly obliged to rise, and, in the course of the
day, discharged twenty pints of water.
Johnson, being eased of his dropsy, began to entertain hopes that the
vigour of his constitution was not entirely broken. For the sake of
conversing with his friends, he established a conversation club, to meet
on every Wednesday evening; and, to serve a man whom he had known in Mr.
Thrale's household for many years, the place was fixed at his house, in
Essex street, near the Temple. To answer the malignant remarks of sir
John Hawkins, on this subject, were a wretched waste of time. Professing
to be Johnson's friend, that biographer has raised more objections to
his character, than all the enemies to that excellent man. Sir John had
a root of bitterness that "put rancours in the vessel of his peace."
Fielding, he says, was the inventor of a cant phrase, "Goodness of
heart, which means little more than the virtue of a horse or a dog." He
should have known, that kind affections are the essence of virtue: they
are the will of God implanted in our nature, to aid and strengthen moral
obligation; they incite to action: a sense of benevolence is no less
necessary than a sense of duty. Good affections are an ornament, not
only to an author, but to his writings. He who shows himself upon a cold
scent for opportunities to bark and snarl throughout a volume of six
hundred pages, may, if he will, pretend to moralise; but goodness of
heart, or, to use that politer phrase, "the virtue of a horse or a dog,"
would redound more to his honour. But sir John is no more: our business
is with Johnson. The members of his club were respectable for their
rank, their talents, and their literature. They attended with
punctuality, till about Midsummer, 1784, when, with some appearance of
health, Johnson went into Derbyshire, and thence to Lichfield. While he
was in that part of the world, his friends, in town, were labouring for
his benefit. The air of a more southern climate, they thought, might
prolong a valuable life. But a pension of three hundred pounds a year
was a slender fund for a travelling valetudinarian, and it was not then
known that he had saved a moderate sum of money. Mr. Boswell and sir
Joshua Reynolds undertook to solicit the patronage of the chancellor.
With lord Thurlow, while he was at the bar, Johnson was well acquainted.
He was often heard to say, "Thurlow is a man of such vigour of mind,
that I never knew I was to meet him, but--I was going to say, I was
afraid, but that would not be true, for I never was afraid of any man;
but I never knew that I was to meet Thurlow, but I knew I had something
to encounter." The chancellor undertook to recommend Johnson's case; but
without success. To protract, if possible, the days of a man, whom he
respected, he offered to advance the sum of five hundred pounds. Being
informed of this at Lichfield, Johnson wrote the following letter:
"MY LORD,--After a long, and not inattentive observation of mankind,
the generosity of your lordship's offer raises in me not less wonder
than gratitude. Bounty, so liberally bestowed, I should gladly
receive, if my condition made it necessary; for to such a mind who
would not be proud to own his obligations? But it has pleased God to
restore me to so great a measure of health, that, if I should now
appropriate so much of a fortune destined to do good, I could not
escape from myself the charge of advancing a false claim. My journey
to the continent, though I once thought it necessary, was never much
encouraged by my physicians; and I was very desirous that your
lordship should be told it, by sir Joshua Reynolds, as an event very
uncertain; for, if I grew much better, I should not be willing; if
much worse, I should not be able to migrate. Your lordship was first
solicited without my knowledge; but when I was told that you were
pleased to honour me with your patronage, I did not expect to hear of
a refusal; yet, as I have had no long time to brood hopes, and have
not rioted in imaginary opulence, this cold reception has been scarce
a disappointment; and from your lordship's kindness I have received a
benefit which only men, like you, are able to bestow. I shall now live
_mihi carior_, with a higher opinion of my own merit.
I am, my lord,
Your lordship's most obliged,
Most grateful, and most humble servant,
September, 1784."
We have, in this instance, the exertion of two congenial minds; one,
with a generous impulse, relieving merit in distress; and the other, by
gratitude and dignity of sentiment, rising to an equal elevation.
It seems, however, that greatness of mind is not confined to greatness
of rank. Dr. Brocklesby was not content to assist with his medical art;
he resolved to minister to his patient's mind, and pluck from his memory
the sorrow which the late refusal from a high quarter might occasion. To
enable him to visit the south of France, in pursuit of health, he
offered, from his own funds, an annuity of one hundred pounds, payable
quarterly. This was a sweet oblivious antidote, but it was not accepted,
for the reasons assigned to the chancellor. The proposal, however, will
do honour to Dr. Brocklesby, as long as liberal sentiment shall be
ranked among the social virtues.
In the month of October, 1784, we find Dr. Johnson corresponding with
Mr. Nichols, the intelligent compiler of the Gentleman's Magazine, and,
in the languor of sickness, still desirous to contribute all in his
power to the advancement of science and useful knowledge. He says, in a
letter to that gentleman, dated Lichfield, October 20, that "he should
be glad to give so skilful a lover of antiquities any information." He
adds, "At Ashbourne, where I had very little company, I had the luck to
borrow Mr. Bowyer's Life, a book, so full of contemporary history, that
a literary man must find some of his old friends. I thought that I
could, now and then, have told you some hints worth your notice: we,
perhaps, may talk a life over. I hope we shall be much together. You
must now be to me what you were before, and what dear Mr. Allen was
besides. He was taken unexpectedly away, but, I think, he was a very
good man. I have made very little progress in recovery. I am very weak,
and very sleepless; but I live on and hope."
In that languid condition he arrived, on the 16th of November, at his
house in Bolt court, there to end his days. He laboured with the dropsy
and an asthma. He was attended by Dr. Heberden, Dr. Warren, Dr.
Brocklesby, Dr. Butter, and Mr. Cruikshank, the eminent surgeon.
Eternity presented to his mind an awful prospect, and, with as much
virtue as, perhaps, ever is the lot of man, he shuddered at the thought
of his dissolution. His friends awakened the comfortable reflection of a
well-spent life; and, as his end drew near, they had the satisfaction of
seeing him composed, and even cheerful, insomuch that he was able, in
the course of his restless nights, to make translations of Greek
epigrams from the Anthologia; and to compose a Latin epitaph for his
father, his mother, and his brother Nathaniel. He meditated, at the same
time, a Latin inscription to the memory of Garrick; but his vigour was
exhausted.
His love of literature was a passion that stuck to his last sand. Seven
days before his death he wrote the following letter to his friend Mr.
Nichols:
"SIR,--The late learned Mr. Swinton, of Oxford, having one day
remarked, that one man, meaning, I suppose, no man but himself, could
assign all the parts of the Ancient Universal History to their proper
authors, at the request of sir Robert Chambers, or myself, gave the
account which I now transmit to you, in his own hand, being willing
that of so great a work the history should be known, and that each
writer should receive his due proportion of praise from posterity.
I recommend to you to preserve this scrap of literary intelligence, in
veracity of this account may never be doubted.
I am, sir,
Your most humble servant,
Dec. 6, 1784."
Mr. Swinton.
The History of the Carthaginians.
--Numidians.
--Mauritanians.
--Gaetulians.
--Garamantes.
--Melano-Gaetulians.
--Nigritae.
--Cyrenaica.
--Marmarica.
--Regio Syrtica.
--Turks, Tartars, and Moguls.
--Indians.
--Chinese.
The Dissertation on the peopling of America.
The Dissertation on the Independency of the Arabs.
The Cosmogony, and a small part of the History immediately following.
By Mr. Sale.
To the Birth of Abraham. Chiefly by Mr. Shelvock.
History of the Jews, Gauls, and Spaniards. By Mr. Psalmanazai.
Xenophon's Retreat. By the same.
History of the Persians, and the Constantinopolitan Empire. By Dr.
Campbell.
On the morning of December 7, Dr. Johnson requested to see Mr. Nichols.
A few days before, he had borrowed some of the early volumes of the
magazine, with a professed intention to point out the pieces which he
had written in that collection. The books lay on the table, with many
leaves doubled down, and, in particular, those which contained his share
in the parliamentary debates. Such was the goodness of Johnson's heart,
that he then declared, that "those debates were the only parts of his
writings which gave him any compunction: but that, at the time he wrote
them, he had no conception that he was imposing upon the world, though
they were, frequently, written from very slender materials, and often
from none at all, the mere coinage of his own imagination." He added,
"that he never wrote any part of his work with equal velocity." "Three
columns of the magazine in an hour," he said, "was no uncommon effort;
which was faster than most persons could have transcribed that quantity.
In one day, in particular, and that not a very long one, he wrote twelve
pages, more in quantity than ever he wrote at any other time, except in
the Life of Savage, of which forty-eight pages, in octavo, were the
production of one long day, including a part of the night."
In the course of the conversation, he asked whether any of the family of
Faden, the printer, were living. Being told that the geographer, near
Charing Cross, was Faden's son, he said, after a short pause, "I
borrowed a guinea of his father near thirty years ago; be so good as to
take this, and pay it for me."
Wishing to discharge every duty, and every obligation, Johnson
recollected another debt of ten pounds, which he had borrowed from his
friend, Mr. Hamilton, the printer, about twenty years before. He sent
the money to Mr. Hamilton, at his house in Bedford row, with an apology
for the length of time. The reverend Mr. Strahan was the bearer of the
message, about four or five days before Johnson breathed his last.
Mr. Sastres, whom Dr. Johnson esteemed and mentioned in his will,
entered the room, during his illness. Dr. Johnson, as soon as he saw
him, stretched forth his hand, and, in a tone of lamentation, called
out, "Jam moriturus!" But the love of life was still an active
principle. Feeling himself swelled with the dropsy, he conceived that,
by incisions in his legs, the water might be discharged. Mr. Cruikshank
apprehended that a mortification might be the consequence; but, to
appease a distempered fancy, he gently lanced the surface. Johnson cried
out, "Deeper, deeper! I want length of life, and you are afraid of
giving me pain, which I do not value."
On the 8th of December, the reverend Mr. Strahan drew his will, by
which, after a few legacies, the residue, amounting to about fifteen
hundred pounds, was bequeathed to Frank, the black servant, formerly
consigned to the testator by his friend Dr. Bathurst.
The history of a death-bed is painful. Mr. Strahan informs us, that the
strength of religion prevailed against the infirmity of nature; and his
foreboding dread of the divine justice subsided into a pious trust, and
humble hope of mercy, at the throne of grace. On Monday, the 13th day of
December, the last of his existence on this side the grave, the desire
of life returned with all its former vehemence. He still imagined, that,
by puncturing his legs, relief might be obtained. At eight in the
morning he tried the experiment, but no water followed. In an hour or
two after, he fell into a doze, and about seven in the evening expired
without a groan.
On the 20th of the month his remains, with due solemnities, and a
numerous attendance of his friends, were buried in Westminster abbey,
near the foot of Shakespeare's monument, and close to the grave of the
late Mr. Garrick. The funeral service was read by his friend, Dr.
Taylor.
A black marble over his grave has the following inscription:
obiit XIII die Decembris,
Anno Domini
Aetatis suae LXXV.
If we now look back, as from an eminence, to view the scenes of life,
and the literary labours in which Dr. Johnson was engaged, we may be
able to delineate the features of the man, and to form an estimate of
his genius.
As a man, Dr. Johnson stands displayed in open daylight. Nothing remains
undiscovered. Whatever he said is known; and without allowing him the
usual privilege of hazarding sentiments, and advancing positions for
mere amusement, or the pleasure of discussion, criticism has endeavoured
to make him answerable for what, perhaps, he never seriously thought.
His diary, which has been printed, discovers still more. We have before
us the very heart of the man, with all his inward consciousness; and yet
neither in the open paths of life, nor in his secret recesses, has any
one vice been discovered. We see him reviewing every year of his life,
and severely censuring himself, for not keeping resolutions, which
morbid melancholy, and other bodily infirmities, rendered impracticable.
We see him, for every little defect, imposing on himself voluntary
penance, going through the day with only one cup of tea without milk,
and to the last, amidst paroxysms and remissions of illness, forming
scruples may be called weaknesses; but they are the weaknesses of a
good, a pious, and most excellent man.
His person, it is well known, was large and unwieldy. His nerves were
affected by that disorder, for which, at two years of age, he was
presented to the royal touch. His head shook, and involuntary motions
made it uncertain that his legs and arms would, even at a tea-table,
remain in their proper place. A person of lord Chesterfield's delicacy
might, in his company, be in a fever. He would, sometimes, of his own
accord, do things inconsistent with the established modes of behaviour.
Sitting at table with the celebrated Mrs. Cholmondeley, who exerted
herself to circulate the subscription for Shakespeare, he took hold of
her hand, in the middle of dinner, and held it close to his eye,
wondering at the delicacy and whiteness, till, with a smile, she asked,
"Will he give it to me again, when he has done with it?" The exteriors
of politeness did not belong to Johnson. Even that civility, which
proceeds, or ought to proceed, from the mind, was sometimes violated.
His morbid melancholy had an effect on his temper; his passions were
irritable; and the pride of science, as well as of a fierce independent
spirit, inflamed him, on some occasions, above all bounds of moderation.
Though not in the shade of academic bowers, he led a scholastic life;
and the habit of pronouncing decisions to his friends and visitors, gave
him a dictatorial manner, which was much enforced by a voice naturally
loud, and often overstretched. Metaphysical discussion, moral theory,
systems of religion, and anecdotes of literature, were his favourite
topics. General history had little of his regard. Biography was his
delight. The proper study of mankind is man. Sooner than hear of the
Punic war, he would be rude to the person that introduced the subject.
Johnson was born a logician; one of those, to whom only books of logic
are said to be of use. In consequence of his skill in that art, he loved
argumentation. No man thought more profoundly, nor with such acute
discernment. A fallacy could not stand before him; it was sure to be
refuted by strength of reasoning, and a precision, both in idea and
expression, almost unequalled. When he chose, by apt illustration, to
place the argument of his adversary in a ludicrous light, one was almost
inclined to think ridicule the test of truth. He was surprised to be
told, but it is certainly true, that, with great powers of mind, wit and
humour were his shining talents. That he often argued for the sake of
triumph over his adversary, cannot be dissembled. Dr. Rose, of Chiswick,
has been heard to tell of a friend of his, who thanked him for
introducing him to Dr. Johnson, as he had been convinced, in the course
of a long dispute, that an opinion, which he had embraced as a settled
truth, was no better than a vulgar error. This being reported to
Johnson, "Nay," said he, "do not let him be thankful, for he was right,
and I was wrong." Like his uncle Andrew, in the ring at Smithfield,
Johnson, in a circle of disputants, was determined neither to be thrown
nor conquered. Notwithstanding all his piety, self-government or the
command of his passions in conversation, does not seem to have been
among his attainments. Whenever he thought the contention was for
superiority, he has been known to break out with violence, and even
ferocity. When the fray was over, he generally softened into repentance,
and, by conciliating measures, took care that no animosity should be
left rankling in the breast of his antagonist. Of this defect he seems
to have been conscious. In a letter to Mrs. Thrale, he says, "Poor
Baretti! do not quarrel with him; to neglect him a little will be
sufficient. He means only to be frank and manly and independent, and,
perhaps, as you say, a little wise. To be frank, he thinks, is to be
cynical; and to be independent, is to be rude. Forgive him, dearest
lady, the rather, because of his misbehaviour, I am afraid, he learned
part of me. I hope to set him, hereafter, a better example." For his own
intolerant and over-bearing spirit he apologized, by observing, that it
had done some good; obscenity and impiety were repressed in his company.
It was late in life, before he had the habit of mixing, otherwise than
occasionally, with polite company. At Mr. Thrale's he saw a constant
succession of well-accomplished visiters. In that society he began to
wear off the rugged points of his own character. He saw the advantages
of mutual civility, and endeavoured to profit by the models before him.
He aimed at what has been called, by Swift, the "lesser morals," and by
Cicero, "minores virtutes." His endeavour, though new and late, gave
pleasure to all his acquaintance. Men were glad to see that he was
willing to be communicative on equal terms and reciprocal complacence.
The time was then expected, when he was to cease being what George
Garrick, brother to the celebrated actor, called him, the first time he
heard him converse, "a tremendous companion." He certainly wished to be
polite, and even thought himself so; but his civility still retained
something uncouth and harsh. His manners took a milder tone, but the
endeavour was too palpably seen. He laboured even in trifles. He was a
giant gaining a purchase to lift a feather.
It is observed, by the younger Pliny, that "in the confines of virtue
and great qualities, there are, generally, vices of an opposite nature."
In Dr. Johnson not one ingredient can take the name of vice. From his
attainments in literature, grew the pride of knowledge; and from his
powers of reasoning, the love of disputation and the vain glory of
superior vigour.--His piety, in some instances, bordered on
superstition. He was willing to believe in preternatural agency, and
thought it not more strange, that there should be evil spirits than evil
men. Even the question about second sight held him in suspense. "Second
sight," Mr. Pennant tells us, "is a power of seeing images impressed on
the organs of sight, by the power of fancy; or on the fancy, by the
disordered spirits operating on the mind. It is the faculty of seeing
spectres or visions, which represent an event actually passing at a
distance, or likely to happen at a future day. In 1771, a gentleman, the
last who was supposed to be possessed of this faculty, had a boat at
sea, in a tempestuous night, and, being anxious for his freight,
suddenly started up, and said his men would be drowned, for he had seen
them pass before him with wet garments and dropping locks. The event
corresponded with his disordered fancy. And thus," continues Mr.
Pennant, "a distempered imagination, clouded with anxiety, may make an
impression on the spirits; as persons, restless, and troubled with
indignation, see various forms and figures, while they lie awake in
bed." This is what Dr. Johnson was not willing to reject. He wished for
some positive proof of communications with another world. His
benevolence embraced the whole race of man, and yet was tinctured with
particular prejudices. He was pleased with the minister in the isle of
Skie, and loved him so much, that he began to wish him not a
presbyterian. To that body of dissenters his zeal for the established
church, made him, in some degree, an adversary; and his attachment to a
mixed and limited monarchy, led him to declare open war against what he
called a sullen republican. He would rather praise a man of Oxford than
of Cambridge. He disliked a whig, and loved a tory. These were the
shades of his character, which it has been the business of certain
party-writers to represent in the darkest colours.
Since virtue, or moral goodness, consists in a just conformity of our
actions to the relations, in which we stand to the supreme being and to
our fellow-creatures, where shall we find a man who has been, or
endeavoured to be, more diligent in the discharge of those essential
duties? His first prayer was composed in 1738; he continued those
fervent ejaculations of piety to the end of his life. In his Meditations
we see him scrutinizing himself with severity, and aiming at perfection
unattainable by man. His duty to his neighbour consisted in universal
benevolence, and a constant aim at the production of happiness. Who was
more sincere and steady in his friendships? It has been said, that there
was no real affection between him and Garrick. On the part of the
latter, there might be some corrosions of jealousy. The character of
Prospero, in the Rambler, No. 200, was, beyond all question, occasioned
by Garrick's ostentatious display of furniture and Dresden china. It was
surely fair to take, from this incident, a hint for a moral essay; and,
though no more was intended, Garrick, we are told, remembered it with
uneasiness. He was also hurt, that his Lichfield friend did not think so
highly of his dramatic art, as the rest of the world. The fact was,
Johnson could not see the passions, as they rose, and chased one
another, in the varied features of that expressive face; and, by his own
manner of reciting verses, which was wonderfully impressive, he plainly
showed, that he thought, there was too much of artificial tone and
measured cadence, in the declamation of the theatre. The present writer
well remembers being in conversation with Dr. Johnson, near the side of
the scenes, during the tragedy of King Lear: when Garrick came off the
stage, he said, "You two talk so loud, you destroy all my feelings."
"Prithee," replied Johnson, "do not talk of feelings, Punch has no
feelings." This seems to have been his settled opinion; admirable as
Garrick's imitation of nature always was, Johnson thought it no better
than mere mimickry. Yet, it is certain, that he esteemed and loved
Garrick; that he dwelt with pleasure on his praise; and used to declare,
that he deserved his great success, because, on all applications for
charity, he gave more than was asked. After Garrick's death, he never
talked of him, without a tear in his eye. He offered, if Mrs. Garrick
would desire it of him, to be the editor of his works, and the historian
thought of writing a Latin inscription to the memory of his friend.
Numbers are still living who know these facts, and still remember, with
gratitude, the friendship which he showed to them, with unaltered
affection, for a number of years. His humanity and generosity, in
proportion to his slender income, were unbounded. It has been truly
said, that the lame, the blind, and the sorrowful, found, in his house,
a sure retreat. A strict adherence to truth he considered as a sacred
obligation, insomuch that, in relating the most minute anecdote, he
would not allow himself the smallest addition to embellish his story.
The late Mr. Tyers, who knew Dr. Johnson intimately, observed, "that he
always talked, as if he was talking upon oath."
After a long acquaintance with this excellent man, and an attentive
retrospect to his whole conduct, such is the light in which he appears
to the writer of this essay. The following lines of Horace, may be
deemed his picture in miniature:
"Iracundior est paulo? minus aptus acutis
Naribus horum hominum? rideri possit, eo quod
Rusticius tonso toga defluit, et male laxus
In pede calceus haeret? At est bonus, ut melior vir
Non alius quisquam: at tibi amicus: at ingenium ingens
Inculto latet hoc sub corpore."
"Your friend is passionate, perhaps unfit
For the brisk petulance of modern wit.
His hair ill-cut, his robe, that awkward flows,
Or his large shoes, to raillery expose
The man you love; yet is he not possess'd
Of virtues, with which very few are blest?
While underneath this rude, uncouth disguise,
A genius of extensive knowledge lies."
Francis's Hor. book i. sat. 3.
It remains to give a review of Johnson's works; and this, it is
imagined, will not be unwelcome to the reader.
Like Milton and Addison, he seems to have been fond of his Latin poetry.
Those compositions show, that he was an early scholar; but his verses
have not the graceful ease, that gave so much suavity to the poems of
Addison. The translation of the Messiah labours under two disadvantages:
it is first to be compared with Pope's inimitable performance, and
afterwards with the Pollio of Virgil. It may appear trifling to remark,
that he has made the letter _o_, in the word _virgo_, long and short in
the same line: "Virgo, virgo parit." But the translation has great
merit, and some admirable lines. In the odes there is a sweet
flexibility, particularly--to his worthy friend Dr. Lawrence; on himself
at the theatre, March 8, 1771; the ode in the isle of Skie; and that to
Mrs. Thrale, from the same place.
His English poetry is such as leaves room to think, if he had devoted
himself to the muses, that he would have been the rival of Pope. His
first production, in this kind, was London, a poem in imitation of the
third satire of Juvenal. The vices of the metropolis are placed in the
room of ancient manners. The author had heated his mind with the ardour
of Juvenal, and, having the skill to polish his numbers, he became a
sharp accuser of the times. The Vanity of Human Wishes, is an imitation
of the tenth satire of the same author. Though it is translated by
Dryden, Johnson's imitation approaches nearest to the spirit of the
original. The subject is taken from the Alcibiades of Plato, and has an
intermixture of the sentiments of Socrates, concerning the object of
prayers offered up to the deity. The general proposition is, that good
and evil are so little understood by mankind, that their wishes, when
granted, are always destructive. This is exemplified in a variety of
instances, such as riches, state-preferment, eloquence, military glory,
long life, and the advantages of form and beauty. Juvenal's conclusion
is worthy of a christian poet, and such a pen as Johnson's. "Let us," he
says, "leave it to the gods to judge what is fittest for us. Man is
dearer to his creator than to himself. If we must pray for special
favour, let it be for a sound mind in a sound body. Let us pray for
fortitude, that we may think the labours of Hercules, and all his
sufferings, preferable to a life of luxury, and the soft repose of
Sardanapalus. This is a blessing within the reach of every man; this we
can give ourselves. It is virtue, and virtue only, that can make us
happy." In the translation, the zeal of the christian conspired with the
warmth and energy of the poet; but Juvenal is not eclipsed. For the
various characters in the original, the reader is pleased, in the
English poem, to meet with cardinal Wolsey, Buckingham stabbed by
Felton, lord Strafford, Clarendon, Charles the twelfth of Sweden; and
for Tully and Demosthenes, Lydiat, Galileo, and archbishop Laud. It is
owing to Johnson's delight in biography, that the name of Lydiat is
called forth from obscurity. It may, therefore, not be useless to tell,
that Lydiat was a learned divine and mathematician in the beginning of
the last century. He attacked the doctrine of Aristotle and Scaliger,
and wrote a number of sermons on the harmony of the evangelists. With
all his merit, he lay in the prison of Bocardo, at Oxford, till bishop
Usher, Laud, and others, paid his debts. He petitioned Charles the first
to be sent to Ethiopia, to procure manuscripts. Having spoken in favour
of monarchy and bishops, he was plundered by the puritans, and twice
carried away, a prisoner, from his rectory. He died, very poor, in 1646.
The tragedy of Irene is founded on a passage in Knolles's History of the
Turks; an author highly commended in the Rambler, No. 122. An incident
in the life of Mahomet the great, first emperor of the Turks, is the
hinge on which the fable is made to move. The substance of the story is
shortly this: In 1453, Mahomet laid siege to Constantinople, and having
reduced the place, became enamoured of a fair Greek, whose name was
Irene. The sultan invited her to embrace the law of the prophet, and to
grace his throne. Enraged at this intended marriage, the janizaries
formed a conspiracy to dethrone the emperor. To avert the impending
danger, Mahomet, in a full assembly of the grandees, "catching with one
hand," as Knolles relates it, "the fair Greek by the hair of her head,
and drawing his falchion with the other, he, at one blow, struck off her
head, to the great terror of them all; and, having so done, said unto
them: 'Now by this, judge whether your emperor is able to bridle his
affections or not.'" The story is simple, and it remained for the author
to amplify it, with proper episodes, and give it complication and
variety. The catastrophe is changed, and horror gives place to terror
and pity. But, after all, the fable is cold and languid. There is not,
throughout the piece, a single situation to excite curiosity, and raise
a conflict of passions. The diction is nervous, rich, and elegant; but
splendid language, and melodious numbers, will make a fine poem--not a
tragedy. The sentiments are beautiful, always happily expressed, but
seldom appropriated to the character, and generally too philosophic.
What Johnson has said of the tragedy of Cato, may be applied to Irene:
"It is rather a poem in dialogue than a drama; rather a succession of
just sentiments, in elegant language, than a representation of natural
affections. Nothing excites or assuages emotion. The events are expected
without solicitude, and are remembered without joy or sorrow. Of the
agents we have no care; we consider not what they are doing, nor what
they are suffering; we wish only to know, what they have to say. It is
unaffecting elegance, and chill philosophy." The following speech, in
the mouth of a Turk, who is supposed to have heard of the British
constitution, has been often selected from the numberless beauties with
which Irene abounds:
"If there be any land, as fame reports,
Where common laws restrain the prince and subject;
A happy land, where circulating power
Flows through each member of th' embodied state,
Sure, not unconscious of the mighty blessing,
Her grateful sons shine bright with ev'ry virtue;
Untainted with the LUST OF INNOVATION;
Sure, all unite to hold her league of rule,
Unbroken, as the sacred chain of nature,
That links the jarring elements in peace."
These are British sentiments. Above forty years ago, they found an echo
in the breast of applauding audiences; and to this hour they are the
voice of the people, in defiance of the metaphysics, and the new lights
of certain politicians, who would gladly find their private advantage in
the disasters of their country; a race of men, "quibus nulla ex honesto
spes."
The prologue to Irene is written with elegance, and, in a peculiar
style, shows the literary pride and lofty spirit of the author. The
epilogue, we are told, in a late publication, was written by sir William
Yonge. This is a new discovery, but by no means probable. When the
appendages to a dramatic performance are not assigned to a friend, or an
unknown hand, or a person of fashion, they are always supposed to be
written by the author of the play. It is to be wished, however, that the
epilogue, in question, could be transferred to any other writer. It is
An account of the various pieces contained in this edition, such as
miscellaneous tracts, and philological dissertations, would lead beyond
the intended limits of this essay. It will suffice to say, that they are
the productions of a man, who never wanted decorations of language, and
always taught his reader to think. The life of the late king of Prussia,
as far as it extends, is a model of the biographical style. The review
of the Origin of Evil was, perhaps, written with asperity; but the angry
epitaph which it provoked from Soame Jenyns, was an ill-timed
resentment, unworthy of the genius of that amiable author.
The Rambler may be considered, as Johnson's great work. It was the basis
of that high reputation, which went on increasing to the end of his
days. The circulation of those periodical essays was not, at first,
equal to their merit. They had not, like the Spectators, the art of
charming by variety; and, indeed, how could it be expected? The wits of
queen Anne's reign sent their contributions to the Spectator; and
Johnson stood alone. A stagecoach, says sir Richard Steele, must go
forward on stated days, whether there are passengers or not. So it was
with the Rambler, every Tuesday and Saturday, for two years. In this
collection Johnson is the great moral teacher of his countrymen; his
essays form a body of ethics; the observations on life and manners, are
acute and instructive; and the papers, professedly critical, serve to
promote the cause of literature. It must, however, be acknowledged, that
a settled gloom hangs over the author's mind; and all the essays, except
eight or ten, coming from the same fountain-head, no wonder that they
have the raciness of the soil from which they sprang. Of this uniformity
Johnson was sensible. He used to say, that if he had joined a friend or
two, who would have been able to intermix papers of a sprightly turn,
the collection would have been more miscellaneous, and, by consequence,
more agreeable to the generality of readers. This he used to illustrate
by repeating two beautiful stanzas from his own ode to Cave, or Sylvanus
Urban:
"Non ulla musis pagina gratior,
Quam quae severis ludicra jungere
Novit, fatigatamque nugis
Utilibus recreare mentem.
Texente nymphis serta Lycoride,
Rosae ruborem sic viola adjuvat
Iramista, sic Iris refulget
Aethereis variata fucis."
It is remarkable, that the pomp of diction, which has been objected to
Johnson, was first assumed in the Rambler. His Dictionary was going on
at the same time, and, in the course of that work, as he grew familiar
with technical and scholastic words, he thought that the bulk of his
readers were equally learned; or, at least, would admire the splendour
and dignity of the style. And yet it is well known, that he praised, in
Cowley, the ease and unaffected structure of the sentences. Cowley may
be placed at the head of those who cultivated a clear and natural style.
Dryden, Tillotson, and sir William Temple followed. Addison, Swift, and
Pope, with more correctness, carried our language well nigh to
perfection. Of Addison, Johnson was used to say, "he is the Raphael of
essay writers." How he differed so widely from such elegant models, is a
problem not to be solved, unless it be true, that he took an early
tincture from the writers of the last century, particularly sir Thomas
Browne. Hence the peculiarities of his style, new combinations,
sentences of an unusual structure, and words derived from the learned
languages. His own account of the matter is: "When common words were
less pleasing to the ear, or less distinct in their signification, I
familiarized the terms of philosophy, by applying them to popular
ideas." But he forgot the observation of Dryden: "If too many foreign
words are poured in upon us, it looks, as if they were designed, not to
assist the natives, but to conquer them." There is, it must be admitted,
a swell of language, often out of all proportion to the sentiment; but
there is, in general, a fulness of mind, and the thought seems to expand
with the sound of the words. Determined to discard colloquial barbarisms
and licentious idioms, he forgot the elegant simplicity that
distinguishes the writings of Addison. He had, what Locke calls, a
round-about view of his subject; and, though he never was tainted, like
many modern wits, with the ambition of shining in paradox, he may be
fairly called an original thinker. His reading was extensive. He
treasured in his mind whatever was worthy of notice, but he added to it
from his own meditation. He collected, "quae reconderet, auetaque
promeret." Addison was not so profound a thinker. He was "born to write,
converse, and live with ease;" and he found an early patron in lord
Somers. He depended, however, more upon a fine taste than the vigour of
his mind. His Latin poetry shows, that he relished, with a just
selection, all the refined and delicate beauties of the Roman classics;
and, when he cultivated his native language, no wonder that he formed
that graceful style, which has been so justly admired; simple, yet
elegant; adorned, yet never over-wrought; rich in allusion, yet pure and
perspicuous; correct, without labour; and though, sometimes, deficient
in strength, yet always musical. His essays, in general, are on the
surface of life; if ever original, it was in pieces of humour. Sir Roger
de Coverly, and the tory fox-hunter, need not to be mentioned. Johnson
had a fund of humour, but he did not know it; nor was he willing to
descend to the familiar idiom, and the variety of diction, which that
mode of composition required. The letter, in the Rambler, No. 12, from a
young girl that wants a place, will illustrate this observation. Addison
possessed an unclouded imagination, alive to the first objects of nature
and of art. He reaches the sublime without any apparent effort. When he
tells us, "If we consider the fixed stars as so many oceans of flame,
that are each of them attended with a different set of planets; if we
still discover new firmaments, and new lights, that are sunk further in
those unfathomable depths of ether; we are lost in a labyrinth of suns
and worlds, and confounded with the magnificence and immensity of
nature;" the ease, with which this passage rises to unaffected grandeur,
is the secret charm that captivates the reader. Johnson is always lofty;
he seems, to use Dryden's phrase, to be "o'erinform'd with meaning," and
his words do not appear to himself adequate to his conception. He moves
in state, and his periods are always harmonious. His Oriental Tales are
in the true style of eastern magnificence, and yet none of them are so
much admired, as the Visions of Mirza. In matters of criticism, Johnson
is never the echo of preceding writers. He thinks, and decides, for
himself. If we except the essays on the Pleasures of Imagination,
Addison cannot be called a philosophical critic. His moral essays are
beautiful; but in that province nothing can exceed the Rambler, though
Johnson used to say, that the essay on "the burthens of mankind," (in
the Spectator, No. 558,) was the most exquisite he had ever read.
Talking of himself, Johnson said, "Topham Beauclerk has wit, and every
thing comes from him with ease; but when I say a good thing, I seem to
labour." When we compare him with Addison, the contrast is still
stronger: Addison lends grace and ornament to truth; Johnson gives it
force and energy. Addison makes virtue amiable; Johnson represents it as
an awful duty: Addison insinuates himself with an air of modesty;
Johnson commands like a dictator; but a dictator in his splendid robes,
not labouring at the plough: Addison is the Jupiter of Virgil, with
placid serenity talking to Venus,
"Vultu, quo coelum tempestatesque serenat."
Johnson is Jupiter Tonans: he darts his lightning and rolls his thunder,
in the cause of virtue and piety. The language seems to fall short of
his ideas; he pours along, familiarizing the terms of philosophy, with
bold inversions, and sonorous periods; but we may apply to him, what
Pope has said of Homer: "It is the sentiment that swells and fills out
the diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it: like glass
in the furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, as the breath within
is more powerful, and the heat more intense."
It is not the design of this comparison to decide between these two
eminent writers. In matters of taste every reader will choose for
himself. Johnson is always profound, and, of course, gives the fatigue
of thinking. Addison charms, while he instructs; and writing, as he
always does, a pure, an elegant, and idiomatic style, he may be
pronounced the safest model for imitation.
The essays written by Johnson in the Adventurer, may be called a
continuation of the Rambler. The Idler, in order to be consistent with
the assumed character, is written with abated vigour, in a style of ease
and unlaboured elegance. It is the Odyssey, after the Iliad. Intense
thinking would not become the Idler. The first number presents a well-drawn
portrait of an Idler, and from that character no deviation could
be made. Accordingly, Johnson forgets his austere manner, and plays us
into sense. He still continues his lectures on human life, but he
adverts to common occurrences, and is often content with the topic of
the day. An advertisement in the beginning of the first volume informs
us, that twelve entire essays were a contribution from different hands.
One of these, No. 33, is the journal of a senior fellow, at Cambridge,
but, as Johnson, being himself an original thinker, always revolted from
servile imitation, he has printed the piece with an apology, importing,
that the journal of a citizen, in the Spectator, almost precluded the
attempt of any subsequent writer. This account of the Idler may be
closed, after observing, that the author's mother being buried on the
event, on Saturday, the 27th of the same month, No. 41. The reader, if
he pleases, may compare it with another fine paper in the Rambler, No.
friend.
"Rasselas," says sir John Hawkins, "is a specimen of our language
scarcely to be paralleled; it is written in a style refined to a degree
of immaculate purity, and displays the whole force of turgid eloquence."
One cannot but smile at this encomium. Rasselas, is, undoubtedly, both
elegant and sublime. It is a view of human life, displayed, it must be
owned, in gloomy colours. The author's natural melancholy, depressed, at
the time, by the approaching dissolution of his mother, darkened the
picture. A tale, that should keep curiosity awake by the artifice of
unexpected incidents, was not the design of a mind pregnant with better
things. He, who reads the heads of the chapters, will find, that it is
not a course of adventures that invites him forward, but a discussion of
interesting questions; reflections on human life; the history of Imlac,
the man of learning; a dissertation upon poetry; the character of a wise
and happy man, who discourses, with energy, on the government of the
passions, and, on a sudden, when death deprives him of his daughter,
forgets all his maxims of wisdom, and the eloquence that adorned them,
yielding to the stroke of affliction, with all the vehemence of the
bitterest anguish. It is by pictures of life, and profound moral
reflection, that expectation is engaged, and gratified throughout the
work. The history of the mad astronomer, who imagines that, for five
years, he possessed the regulation of the weather, and that the sun
passed, from tropic to tropic, by his direction, represents, in striking
colours, the sad effects of a distempered imagination. It becomes the
more affecting when we recollect, that it proceeds from one who lived in
fear of the same dreadful visitation; from one who says emphatically:
"Of the uncertainties in our present state, the most dreadful and
alarming is the uncertain continuance of reason." The inquiry into the
cause of madness, and the dangerous prevalence of imagination, till, in
time, some particular train of ideas fixes the attention, and the mind
recurs constantly to the favourite conception, is carried on in a strain
of acute observation; but it leaves us room to think, that the author
was transcribing from his own apprehensions. The discourse on the nature
of the soul, gives us all that philosophy knows, not without a tincture
of superstition. It is remarkable, that the vanity of human pursuits
was, about the same time, the subject that employed both Johnson and
Voltaire; but Candide is the work of a lively imagination; and Rasselas,
with all its splendour of eloquence, exhibits a gloomy picture. It
should, however, be remembered, that the world has known the weeping, as
well as the laughing philosopher.
The Dictionary does not properly fall within the province of this essay.
The preface, however, will be found in this edition. He who reads the
close of it, without acknowledging the force of the pathethic and
sublime, must have more insensibility in his composition, than usually
falls to the share of a man. The work itself, though, in some instances,
abuse has been loud, and, in others, malice has endeavoured to undermine
its fame, still remains the MOUNT ATLAS of English literature.
"Though storms and tempests thunder on its brow,
And oceans break their billows at its feet,
It stands unmov'd, and glories in its height."
That Johnson was eminently qualified for the office of a commentator on
Shakespeare, no man can doubt; but it was an office which he never
cordially embraced. The public expected more than he had diligence to
perform; and yet his edition has been the ground, on which every
subsequent commentator has chosen to build. One note, for its
singularity, may be thought worthy of notice in this place. Hamlet says,
"For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god-kissing
carrion." In this Warburton discovered the origin of evil. Hamlet, he
says, breaks off in the middle of the sentence; but the learned
commentator knows what he was going to say, and, being unwilling to keep
the secret, he goes on in a train of philosophical reasoning, that
leaves the reader in astonishment. Johnson, with true piety, adopts the
fanciful hypothesis, declaring it to be a noble emendation, which almost
sets the critic on a level with the author. The general observations at
the end of the several plays, and the preface, will be found in this
edition. The former, with great elegance and precision, give a summary
view of each drama. The preface is a tract of great erudition and
philosophical criticism.
Johnson's political pamphlets, whatever was his motive for writing them,
whether gratitude for his pension, or the solicitation of men in power,
did not support the cause for which they were undertaken. They are
written in a style truly harmonious, and with his usual dignity of
language. When it is said that he advanced positions repugnant to the
"common rights of mankind," the virulence of party may be suspected. It
is, perhaps, true, that in the clamour, raised throughout the kingdom,
Johnson overheated his mind; but he was a friend to the rights of man,
and he was greatly superior to the littleness of spirit, that might
incline him to advance what he did not think and firmly believe. In the
False Alarm, though many of the most eminent men in the kingdom
concurred in petitions to the throne, yet Johnson, having well surveyed
the mass of the people, has given, with great humour, and no less truth,
what may be called, "the birth, parentage, and education of a
remonstrance." On the subject of Falkland's islands, the fine dissuasive
from too hastily involving the world in the calamities of war, must
extort applause even from the party that wished, at that time, for
scenes of tumult and commotion. It was in the same pamphlet, that
Johnson offered battle to Junius, a writer, who, by the uncommon
elegance of his style, charmed every reader, though his object was to
inflame the nation in favour of a faction. Junius fought in the dark; he
saw his enemy, and had his full blow; while he himself remained safe in
obscurity. "But let us not," said Johnson, "mistake the venom of the
shaft, for the vigour of the bow." The keen invective which he
published, on that occasion, promised a paper war between two
combatants, who knew the use of their weapons. A battle between them was
as eagerly expected, as between Mendoza and Big Ben. But Junius,
whatever was his reason, never returned to the field. He laid down his
arms, and has, ever since, remained as secret as the man in the mask, in
Voltaire's history.
The account of his journey to the Hebrides, or western isles of
Scotland, is a model for such as shall, hereafter, relate their travels.
The author did not visit that part of the world in the character of an
antiquary, to amuse us with wonders taken from the dark and fabulous
ages; nor, as a mathematician, to measure a degree, and settle the
longitude and latitude of the several islands. Those, who expected such
information, expected what was never intended. "In every work regard the
writer's end." Johnson went to see men and manners, modes of life, and
the progress of civilization. His remarks are so artfully blended with
the rapidity and elegance of his narrative, that the reader is inclined
to wish, as Johnson did, with regard to Gray, that "to travel, and to
tell his travels, had been more of his employment."
As to Johnson's Parliamentary Debates, nothing, with propriety, can be
said in this place. They are collected, in two volumes, by Mr.
Stockdale, and the flow of eloquence which runs through the several
speeches, is sufficiently known.
It will not be useless to mention two more volumes, which may form a
proper supplement to this edition. They contain a set of sermons, left
for publication by John Taylor, LL.D. The reverend Mr. Hayes, who
ushered these discourses into the world, has not given them, as the
composition of Dr. Taylor. All he could say for his departed friend was,
that he left them, in silence, among his papers. Mr. Hayes knew them to
be the production of a superior mind; and the writer of these memoirs
owes it to the candour of that elegant scholar, that he is now warranted
to give an additional proof of Johnson's ardour in the cause of piety,
and every moral duty. The last discourse in the collection was intended
to be delivered by Dr. Taylor, at the funeral of Johnson's wife; but
that reverend gentleman declined the office, because, as he told Mr.
Hayes, the praise of the deceased was too much amplified. He, who reads
the piece, will find it a beautiful moral lesson, written with temper,
and nowhere overcharged with ambitious ornaments. The rest of the
discourses were the fund, which Dr. Taylor, from time to time, carried
some of the best sermons.
We come now to the Lives of the Poets, a work undertaken at the age of
seventy, yet, the most brilliant, and, certainly, the most popular, of
all our author's writings. For this performance he needed little
preparation. Attentive always to the history of letters, and, by his own
natural bias, fond of biography, he was the more willing to embrace the
proposition of the booksellers. He was versed in the whole body of
English poetry, and his rules of criticism were settled with precision.
The dissertation, in the life of Cowley, on the metaphysical poets of
the last century, has the attraction of novelty, as well as sound
observation. The writers, who followed Dr. Donne, went in quest of
something better than truth and nature. As Sancho says, in Don Quixote,
they wanted better bread than is made with wheat. They took pains to
bewilder themselves, and were ingenious for no other purpose than to
err. In Johnson's review of Cowley's works, false wit is detected in all
its shapes, and the Gothic taste for glittering conceits, and far-fetched
allusions, is exploded, never, it is hoped, to revive again.
An author who has published his observations on the Life and Writings of
Dr. Johnson, speaking of the Lives of the Poets, says, "These
compositions, abounding in strong and acute remark, and with many fine,
and even sublime, passages, have, unquestionably, great merit; but, if
they be regarded, merely as containing narrations of the lives,
delineations of the characters, and strictures of the several authors,
they are far from being always to be depended on." He adds: "The
characters are sometimes partial, and there is, sometimes, too much
malignity of misrepresentation, to which, perhaps, may be joined no
inconsiderable portion of erroneous criticism." The several clauses of
this censure deserve to be answered, as fully as the limits of this
essay will permit.
In the first place, the facts are related upon the best intelligence,
and the best vouchers that could be gleaned, after a great lapse of
time. Probability was to be inferred from such materials, as could be
procured, and no man better understood the nature of historical evidence
than Dr. Johnson; no man was more religiously an observer of truth. If
his history is any where defective, it must be imputed to the want of
better information, and the errors of uncertain tradition.
"Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura."
If the strictures on the works of the various authors are not always
satisfactory, and if erroneous criticism may sometimes be suspected, who
can hope, that in matters of taste, all shall agree?  The instances, in
which the public mind has differed, from the positions advanced by the
author, are few in number. It has been said, that justice has not been
done to Swift; that Gay and Prior are undervalued; and that Gray has
been harshly treated. This charge, perhaps, ought not to be disputed.
Johnson, it is well known, had conceived a prejudice against Swift. His
friends trembled for him, when he was writing that life, but were
pleased, at last, to see it executed with temper and moderation. As to
Prior, it is probable that he gave his real opinion, but an opinion that
will not be adopted by men of lively fancy. With regard to Gray, when he
condemns the apostrophe, in which father Thames is desired to tell who
drives the hoop, or tosses the ball, and then adds, that father Thames
had no better means of knowing than himself; when he compares the abrupt
beginning of the first stanza of the bard, to the ballad of Johnny
Armstrong, "Is there ever a man in all Scotland;" there are, perhaps,
few friends of Johnson, who would not wish to blot out both the
passages.
It may be questioned, whether the remarks on Pope's Essay on Man can be
received, without great caution. It has been already mentioned, that
Crousaz, a professor in Switzerland, eminent for his Treatise of Logic,
started up a professed enemy to that poem. Johnson says, "his mind was
one of those, in which philosophy and piety are happily united. He
looked, with distrust, upon all metaphysical systems of theology, and
was persuaded, that the positions of Pope were intended to draw mankind
away from revelation, and to represent the whole course of things, as a
necessary concatenation of indissoluble fatality." This is not the place
fur a controversy about the Leibnitzian system. Warburton, with all the
powers of his large and comprehensive mind, published a vindication of
Pope; and yet Johnson says, that, "in many passages, a religious eye may
easily discover expressions not very favourable to morals, or to
liberty." This sentence is severe, and, perhaps, dogmatical. Crousaz
wrote an Examen of the Essay on Man, and, afterwards, a commentary on
every remarkable passage; and, though it now appears, that Mrs.
Elizabeth Carter translated the foreign critic, yet it is certain, that
Johnson encouraged the work, and, perhaps, imbibed those early
prejudices, which adhered to him to the end of his life. He shuddered at
the idea of irreligion. Hence, we are told, in the life of Pope, "Never
were penury of knowledge, and vulgarity of sentiment, so happily
disguised; Pope, in the chair of wisdom, tells much that every man
knows, and much that he did not know himself; and gives us comfort in
the position, that though man's a fool, yet God is wise; that human
advantages are unstable; that our true honour is, not to have a great
part, but to act it well; that virtue only is our own, and that
happiness is always in our power." The reader, when he meets all this in
its new array, no longer knows the talk of his mother and his nurse.
But, may it not be said, that every system of ethics must, or ought, to
terminate, in plain and general maxims for the use of life? and, though
in such anxioms no discovery is made, does not the beauty of the moral
theory consist in the premises, and the chain of reasoning that leads to
the conclusion? May not truth, as Johnson himself says, be conveyed to
the mind by a new train of intermediate images? Pope's doctrine, about
the ruling passion, does not seem to be refuted, though it is called, in
harsh terms, pernicious, as well as false, tending to establish a kind
of moral predestination, or overruling principle, which cannot be
resisted. But Johnson was too easily alarmed in the cause of religion.
Organized as the human race is, individuals have different inlets of
perception, different powers of mind, and different sensations of
pleasure and pain.
"All spread their charms, but charm not all alike,
On different senses different objects strike:
Hence different passions more or less inflame,
As strong or weak the organs of the frame.
And hence one master-passion in the breast,
Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest."
Brumoy says, Pascal, from his infancy, felt himself a geometrician; and
Vandyke, in like manner, was a painter. Shakespeare, who, of all poets,
had the deepest insight into human nature, was aware of a prevailing
bias in the operations of every mind. By him we are told, "Masterless
passion sways us to the mood of what it likes or loathes."
It remains to inquire, whether, in the lives before us, the characters
are partial, and too often drawn with malignity of misrepresentation? To
prove this, it is alleged, that Johnson has misrepresented the
circumstances relative to the translation of the first Iliad, and
maliciously ascribed that performance to Addison, instead of Tickell,
with too much reliance on the testimony of Pope, taken from the account
in the papers left by Mr. Spence. For a refutation of the fallacy
imputed to Addison, we are referred to a note in the Biographia
Britannica, written by the late judge Blackstone, who, it is said,
examined the whole matter with accuracy, and found, that the first
regular statement of the accusation against Addison, was published by
Ruffhead, in his life of Pope, from the materials which he received from
Dr. Warburton. But, with all due deference to the learned judge, whose
talents deserve all praise, this account is by no means accurate.
Sir Richard Steele, in a dedication of the comedy of the Drummer, to Mr.
Congreve, gave the first insight into that business. He says, in a style
of anger and resentment: "If that gentleman (Mr. Tickell) thinks himself
injured, I will allow I have wronged him upon this issue, that, if the
reputed translator of the first book of Homer shall please to give us
another book, there shall appear another good judge in poetry, besides
Mr. Alexander Pope, who shall like it." The authority of Steele
outweighs all opinions, founded on vain conjecture, and, indeed, seems
to be decisive, since we do not find that Tickell, though warmly
pressed, thought proper to vindicate himself.
But the grand proof of Johnson's malignity, is the manner in which he
has treated the character and conduct of Milton. To enforce this charge
has wearied sophistry, and exhausted the invention of a party. What they
cannot deny, they palliate; what they cannot prove, they say is
probable. But why all this rage against Dr. Johnson? Addison, before
him, had said of Milton:
"Oh! had the poet ne'er profan'd his pen,
To varnish o'er the guilt of faithless men!"
And had not Johnson an equal right to avow his sentiments? Do his
enemies claim a privilege to abuse whatever is valuable to Englishmen,
either in church or state? and must the liberty of unlicensed printing
be denied to the friends of the British constitution?
It is unnecessary to pursue the argument through all its artifices,
since, dismantled of ornament and seducing language, the plain truth may
be stated in a narrow compass. Johnson knew that Milton was a
republican: he says, "an acrimonious and surly republican, for which it
is not known that he gave any better reason than, that a popular
government was the most frugal; for the trappings of a monarchy would
set up an ordinary commonwealth." Johnson knew that Milton talked aloud
"of the danger of readmitting kingship in this nation;" and when Milton
adds, "that a commonwealth was commended, or rather enjoined, by our
Saviour himself, to all christians, not without a remarkable
disallowance, and the brand of gentilism upon kingship," Johnson thought
him no better than a wild enthusiast. He knew, as well as Milton, "that
the happiness of a nation must needs be firmest and certainest in a full
and free council of their own electing, where no single person, but
reason only, sways;" but the example of all the republicks, recorded in
the annals of mankind, gave him no room to hope, that reason only would
be heard. He knew, that the republican form of government, having little
or no complication, and no consonance of parts, by a nice mechanism
forming a regular whole, was too simple to be beautiful, even in theory.
In practice it, perhaps, never existed. In its most flourishing state,
at Athens, Rome, and Carthage, it was a constant scene of tumult and
commotion. From the mischiefs of a wild democracy, the progress has ever
been to the dominion of an aristocracy; and the word aristocracy,
fatally includes the boldest and most turbulent citizens, who rise by
their crimes, and call themselves the best men in the state. By
intrigue, by cabal, and faction, a pernicious oligarchy is sure to
succeed, and end, at last, in the tyranny of a single ruler. Tacitus,
the great master of political wisdom, saw, under the mixed authority of
king, nobles, and people, a better form of government than Milton's
boasted republick; and what Tacitus admired in theory, but despaired of
enjoying, Johnson saw established in this country. He knew that it had
been overturned by the rage of frantic men; but he knew that, after the
iron rod of Cromwell's usurpation, the constitution was once more
restored to its first principles. Monarchy was established, and this
country was regenerated. It was regenerated a second time, at the
revolution: the rights of men were then defined, and the blessings of
good order, and civil liberty, have been ever since diffused through the
whole community.
The peace and happiness of society were what Dr. Johnson had at heart.
He knew that Milton called his defence of the regicides, a defence of
the people of England; but, however glossed and varnished, he thought it
an apology for murder. Had the men, who, under a show of liberty,
brought their king to the scaffold, proved, by their subsequent conduct,
that the public good inspired their actions, the end might have given
some sanction to the means; but usurpation and slavery followed. Milton
undertook the office of secretary, under the despotic power of Cromwell,
offering the incense of adulation to his master, with the titles of
"director of public councils, the leader of unconquered armies, the
father of his country." Milton declared, at the same time, "that nothing
is more pleasing to God, or more agreeable to reason, than that the
highest mind should have the sovereign power." In this strain of servile
flattery, Milton gives us the right divine of tyrants. But it seems, in
the same piece, he exhorts Cromwell "not to desert those great
principles of liberty which he had professed to espouse; for, it would
be a grievous enormity, if, after having successfully opposed tyranny,
he should himself act the part of a tyrant, and betray the cause that he
had defended." This desertion of every honest principle the advocate for
liberty lived to see. Cromwell acted the tyrant; and, with vile
hypocrisy, told the people, that he had consulted the Lord, and the Lord
would have it so. Milton took an under part in the tragedy. Did that
become the defender of the people of England? Brutus saw his country
enslaved; he struck the blow for freedom, and he died with honour in the
cause. Had he lived to be a secretary under Tiberius, what would now be
said of his memory?
But still, it seems, the prostitution with which Milton is charged,
since it cannot be defended, is to be retorted on the character of
Johnson. For this purpose, a book has been published, called Remarks on
Dr. Johnson's Life of Milton; to which are added, Milton's Tractate of
Education, and Areopagitica. In this laboured tract we are told, "There
is one performance, ascribed to the pen of the Doctor, where the
prostitution is of so singular a nature, that it would be difficult to
select an adequate motive for it, out of the mountainous heap of
conjectural causes of human passions, or human caprice. It is the speech
of the late unhappy Dr. William Dodd, when he was about to hear the
sentence of the law pronounced upon him, in consequence of an indictment
for forgery. The voice of the public has given the honour of
manufacturing this speech to Dr. Johnson; and the style, and
configuration of the speech itself, confirm the imputation. But it is
hardly possible to divine what could be his motive for accepting the
office. A man, to express the precise state of mind of another, about to
be destined to an ignominious death, for a capital crime, should, one
would imagine, have some consciousness, that he himself had incurred
some guilt of the same kind." In all the schools of sophistry, is there
to be found so vile an argument? In the purlieus of Grub street, is
there such another mouthful of dirt? In the whole quiver of malice, is
there so envenomed a shaft?
After this, it is to be hoped, that a certain class of men will talk no
more of Johnson's malignity. The last apology for Milton is, that he
acted according to his principles. But Johnson thought those principles
detestable; pernicious to the constitution, in church and state,
destructive of the peace of society, and hostile to the great fabric of
civil policy, which the wisdom of ages has taught every Briton to
revere, to love, and cherish. He reckoned Milton in that class of men,
of whom the Roman historian says, when they want, by a sudden
convulsion, to overturn the government, they roar and clamour for
liberty; if they succeed, they destroy liberty itself: "Ut imperium
evertant, libertatem praeferunt; si perverterint, libertatem ipsam
aggredientur." Such were the sentiments of Dr. Johnson; and it may be
asked, in the language of Bolingbroke, "Are these sentiments, which any
man, who is born a Briton, in any circumstances, in any situation, ought
to be ashamed, or afraid to avow?" Johnson has done ample justice to
Milton's poetry: the criticism on Paradise Lost is a sublime
composition. Had he thought the author as good and pious a citizen as
Dr. Watts, he would have been ready, notwithstanding his nonconformity,
to do equal honour to the memory of the man.
It is now time to close this essay, which the author fears has been
drawn too much into length. In the progress of the work, feeble as it
may be, he thought himself performing the last human office to the
memory of a friend, whom he loved, esteemed, and honoured:
"His saltern accumulem donis, et fungar inani
Munere."--
The author of these memoirs has been anxious to give the features of the
man, and the true character of the author. He has not suffered the hand
of partiality to colour his excellencies with too much warmth; nor has
he endeavoured to throw his singularities too much into the shade. Dr.
Johnson's failings may well be forgiven, for the sake of his virtues.
His defects were spots in the sun. His piety, his kind affections, and
the goodness of his heart, present an example worthy of imitation. His
works still remain a monument of genius and of learning. Had he written
nothing but what is contained in this edition, the quantity shows a life
spent in study and meditation. If to this be added, the labour of his
Dictionary, and other various productions, it may be fairly allowed, as
he used to say of himself, that he has written his share. In the volumes
here presented to the public the reader will find a perpetual source of
pleasure and instruction. With due precautions, authors may learn to
grace their style with elegance, harmony, and precision; they may be
taught to think with vigour and perspicuity; and, to crown the whole, by
a diligent attention to these books, all may advance in virtue.
his Prayers. After the alteration of the style, he kept his birthday
on the 18th of September, and it is accordingly marked September
recorded by Mrs. Piozzi in her anecdotes; and Johnson's description
of it is picturesque and poetical. Being asked if he could remember
queen Anne, "he had (he said) a confused, but somehow a sort of
solemn recollection of a lady in diamonds, and a long black hood."
through life a fair and upright character. "1732, Junii 15. Undecim
aureos deposui, quo die, quidquid ante matris funus (quod serum sit
precor) de paternis bonis sperare licet, viginti scilicet libras,
accepi. Usque adeo mihi mea fortuna fingenda est. Interea, ne
paupertate vires animi languescant, nec in flagitia egestas abigat,
cavendum."
falsehood. He says, a deep pool of water reaches to the very foot of
the rock; and, allowing that there was a seat or bench (which there
is not) in the middle of the pool, it is absolutely impossible, by
any exertion of human strength, to have arrived at it. But it may be
asked, can Mr. Bruce say what was the face of the country in the
year 1622, when Lobo saw the magnificent sight which he has
described? Mr. Bruce's pool of water may have been formed since; and
Lobo, perhaps, was content to sit down without a bench.
Bruce, the reader will judge, whether Lobo is to lose the honour of
having been at the head of the Nile, near two centuries before any
other European traveller.
p. 202.
'Sir, he was impertinent to me, and I beat him. But it was not in
his shop: it was in my own chamber.'"
i. p. 128. oct. edit. 1804.
a yet more vile impostor.
Dictionary was fully established in reputation.
doubt, by Dr. Johnson,) Gent. Mag. 1748, p. 8.
the above. See his Life of Johnson, vol. i. p. 360. 8vo. edit. 1804.
volume of the Gentleman's Magazine, for 1781, p. 370, the following
account of the Universal History. The proposals were published
October 6, 1729; and the authors of the first seven volumes were,
Vol. I. Mr. Sale, translator of the Koran.    IV. The same as vol. iii.
II. George Psalmanazar.                    V. Mr. Bower.
III. George Psalmanazar.                   VI. Mr. Bower.
Archibald Bower.                          Rev. John Swinton.
Captain Shelvock.                    VII. Mr. Swinton.
Dr. Campbell.                             Mr. Bower.
undertaking. The assistance, however, which he gave to Davies, in
writing the Life of Garrick, has been acknowledged, in general
terms, by that writer, and, from the evidence of style, appears to
have been very considerable.
sir William Yonge. See Boswell's Life of Johnson, vol. i. p. 469--
Johnson's, is very strong, particularly in the line, "But how the
devil," &c.
We will not examine here Johnson's poetical merits, since that
discussion will more properly introduce his Lives of the Poets, but
merely offer some few biographical remarks. In the poem of London, Mr.
Boswell was of opinion, that Johnson did not allude to Savage, under the
name of Thales, and adds, for his reason, that Johnson was not so much
as acquainted with Savage when he _wrote_ his London. About a month,
however, before he _published_ this poem, he addressed the following
lines to him, through the Gentleman's Magazine, for April, 1738.
Humanani studium generis cui pectore fervet
O colat humanum te, foveatque, genus!
We cannot certainly infer, from this, an intimacy with Savage, but it is
more probable, that these lines flowed from a feeling of private
friendship, than mere admiration of an author, in a public point of
view; and they, at any rate, give credibility to the general opinion,
that, under the name of Thales, the poet referred to the author of the
Wanderer, who was, at this time, preparing for his retreat to Wales,
whither he actually went in the ensuing year.
The names of Lydiat, Vane, and Sedley, which are brought forward in the
poem on the Vanity of Human Wishes, as examples of inefficiency of
either learning or beauty, to shield their possessors from distress,
have exercised inquiry. The following is the best account of them we can
collect:
THOMAS LYDIAT was born in 1572. After passing through the studies of the
university of Oxford, with applause, he was elected fellow of New
college; but his defective utterance induced him to resign his
fellowship, in order to avoid entering holy orders, and to live upon a
small patrimony. He was highly esteemed by the accomplished and
unfortunate prince Henry, son of James the first. But his hopes of
provision in that quarter were blasted by that prince's premature death;
and he then accompanied the celebrated Usher into Ireland. After two or
three years, he returned to England, and poverty induced him now to
accept the rectory of Okerton, near Banbury, which he had before
declined. Here he imprudently became security for the debts of a
relation, and, being unable to pay, was imprisoned for several years. He
was released, at last, by his patron, Usher, sir W. Boswell, Dr. Pink,
then warden of New college, and archbishop Laud, to whom he showed his
gratitude by writing in defence of his measures of church-government. He
now applied to Charles the first for his protection and encouragement to
travel into the east, to collect MSS. but the embarrassed state of the
king's affairs prevented his petition from receiving attention. Lastly,
his well-known attachment to the royal cause drew upon him the repeated
violence of the parliament troops, who plundered, imprisoned, and abused
him, in the most cruel manner. He died in obscurity and indigence, in
society of New college, who also erected an honorary monument to his
memory in the cloisters of their college. We have dwelt thus long on
Lydiat's name, because, when this poem was published, it was a subject
of inquiry, who Lydiat was, though some of his contemporaries, both in
England and on the continent, ranked him with lord Bacon, in
mathematical and physical knowledge. For a more detailed account, see
Chalmers' Biographical Dictionary, vol. xxi. whence the above facts have
been extracted, and Gentleman's Magazine, vol. lxviii. GALILEO, and his
history, are too well known to require a note in this place.
The VANE, who told, "what ills from beauty spring," was not Lady Vane,
the subject of Smollett's memoirs, in Peregrine Pickle, but, according
to Mr. Malone, she was Anne Vane, mistress to Frederick prince of Wales,
and died in 1736, not long before Johnson settled in London. Some
account of her was published, under the title of the Secret History of
Vanella, 8vo. 1732, and in other similar works, referred to in Boswell,
i. 173. In Mr. Boswell's Tour to the Hebrides, we find lord Hailes
objecting to the instances of unfortunate beauties selected by Johnson,
and suggesting, in place of Vane and Sedley, the names of Shore and
Valiere.
CATHERINE SEDLEY was daughter of sir Charles Sedley, mistress of king
James the second, who created her countess of Dorchester. She was a
woman of a sprightly and agreeable wit, which could charm without the
aid of beauty, and longer maintain its power. She had been the king's
mistress before he ascended the throne, and soon after (January 2,
looked on this title, as a splendid indignity, purchased at the expense of
his daughter's honour; and when he was very active against the king, about
the time of the revolution, he said, that, in gratitude, he should do
his utmost to make his majesty's daughter a queen, as the king had made
his own a countess. The king continued to visit her, which gave great
uneasiness to the queen, who employed her friends, particularly the
priests, to persuade him to break off the correspondence. They
remonstrated with him on the guilt of the commerce, and the reproach it
would bring on the catholic religion; she, on the contrary, employed the
whole force of her ridicule against the priests and their counsels.
They, at length, prevailed, and he is said to have sent her word to
retire to France, or that her pension of 4,000_l_. a year should be
withdrawn. She then, probably, repented of having been the royal
mistress, and "cursed the form that pleased the king."
See Manning and Bray's Surrey, ii. 788. where the countess's issue is
also given. See, also, Christian's note on Blackstone's Com. iv. p. 65.
It is remarkable, that when Johnson was asked, at a late period of his
life, to whom he had alluded, under the name of Sedley, he said, that he
had quite forgotten. See note on Idler, No. 36.--ED.
--Quis ineptae
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?  JUV.
When injur'd Thales bids the town farewell,
Yet still my calmer thoughts his choice commend,
I praise the hermit, but regret the friend;
Resolv'd at length, from vice and London far,
To breathe, in distant fields, a purer air,
And, fix'd on Cambria's solitary shore,
Give to St. David one true Briton more.
Or change the rocks of Scotland for the Strand?
There none are swept by sudden fate away,
But all, whom hunger spares, with age decay:
Here malice, rapine, accident, conspire,
And now a rabble rages, now a fire;
Their ambush here relentless ruffians lay,
And here the fell attorney prowls for prey;
Here falling houses thunder on your head,
And here a female atheist talks you dead.
Of dissipated wealth the small remains,
On Thames's banks, in silent thought, we stood
Where Greenwich smiles upon the silver flood;
We kneel, and kiss the consecrated earth;
In pleasing dreams the blissful age renew,
And call Britannia's glories back to view;
Behold her cross triumphant on the main,
The guard of commerce, and the dread of Spain,
Ere masquerades debauch'd, excise oppress'd
Or English honour grew a standing jest.
A transient calm the happy scenes bestow,
And, for a moment, lull the sense of woe.
At length awaking, with contemptuous frown,
Indignant Thales eyes the neighb'ring town.
Wants ev'n the cheap reward of empty praise;
In those curs'd walls, devote to vice and gain,
Since unrewarded science toils in vain;
Since hope but sooths to double my distress,
And ev'ry moment leaves my little less;
And life, still vig'rous, revels in my veins;
Grant me, kind heaven, to find some happier place,
Where honesty and sense are no disgrace;
Some pleasing bank where verdant osiers play,
Some peaceful vale, with nature's paintings gay;
Where once the harass'd Briton found repose,
And, safe in poverty, defied his foes;
Some secret cell, ye pow'rs, indulgent give,
Here let those reign, whom pensions can incite
To vote a patriot black, a courtier white;
Explain their country's dear-bought rights away,
With slavish tenets taint our poison'd youth,
And lend a lie the confidence of truth.
Collect a tax, or farm a lottery;
And lull to servitude a thoughtless age.
Heroes, proceed! what bounds your pride shall hold,
What check restrain your thirst of pow'r and gold?
Behold rebellious virtue quite o'erthrown,
Behold our fame, our wealth, our lives, your own.
To such the plunder of a land is giv'n,
When publick crimes inflame the wrath of heaven:
Who start at theft, and blush at perjury?
Who scarce forbear, though Britain's court he sing,
To pluck a titled poet's borrow'd wing;
A statesman's logick unconvinc'd can hear.
Despise a fool in half his pension dress'd,
Can sap the principles, or taint the heart;
With more address a lover's note convey,
Or bribe a virgin's innocence away.
Well may they rise, while I, whose rustick tongue
Ne'er knew to puzzle right, or varnish wrong,
Spurn'd as a beggar, dreaded as a spy,
Live unregarded, unlamented die.
Who shares Orgilio's crimes, his fortune shares.
All Marlb'rough hoarded, or all Villiers spent,
Turn from the glitt'ring bribe thy scornful eye,
Nor sell for gold, what gold could never buy,
The peaceful slumber, self-approving day,
Unsullied fame, and conscience ever gay.
Mark whom the great caress, who frown on me!
London! the needy villain's gen'ral home,
The common sewer of Paris and of Rome;
With eager thirst, by folly or by fate,
Sucks in the dregs of each corrupted state.
Forgive my transports, on a theme like this,
The land of heroes and of saints survey;
Nor hope the British lineaments to trace,
The rustick grandeur, or the surly grace;
But, lost in thoughtless ease and empty show,
Behold the warriour dwindled to a beau;
Sense, freedom, piety, refin'd away,
Of France the mimick, and of Spain the prey.
All that at home no more can beg or steal,
Or like a gibbet better than a wheel;
Hiss'd from the stage, or hooted from the court,
Their air, their dress, their politicks, import;
On Britain's fond credulity they prey.
No gainful trade their industry can 'scape,
All sciences a fasting Monsieur knows,
And, bid him go to hell, to hell he goes.
I drew the breath of life in English air;
Was early taught a Briton's right to prize,
And lisp the tale of Henry's victories;
If the gull'd conqueror receives the chain,
The supple Gaul was born a parasite:
Still to his int'rest true, where'er he goes,
Wit, brav'ry, worth, his lavish tongue bestows;
In ev'ry face a thousand graces shine,
From ev'ry tongue flows harmony divine.
Strain out, with fault'ring diffidence, a lie,
Besides, with justice, this discerning age
Admires their wondrous talents for the stage:
Who play from morn to night a borrow'd part;
Practis'd their master's notions to embrace,
Repeat his maxims, and reflect his face;
With ev'ry wild absurdity comply,
And view each object with another's eye;
To shake with laughter, ere the jest they hear,
To pour at will the counterfeited tear;
And, as their patron hints the cold or heat.
To shake in dog-days, in December sweat.
Can surly virtue hope to fix a friend?
Slaves that with serious impudence beguile,
And lie without a blush, without a smile;
Exalt each trifle, ev'ry vice adore,
Your taste in snuff, your judgment in a whore:
Can Balbo's eloquence applaud, and swear,
He gropes his breeches with a monarch's air.
For arts, like these, preferr'd, admir'd, caress'd,
They first invade your table, then your breast;
Watch the weak hour, and ransack all the heart;
Then soon your ill-placed confidence repay,
Commence your lords, and govern or betray.
All crimes are safe, but hated poverty.
This, only this, the rigid law pursues,
This, only this, provokes the snarling muse.
The sober trader at a tatter'd cloak
Wakes from his dream, and labours for a joke;
With brisker air the silken courtiers gaze,
And turn the varied taunt a thousand ways.
Sure the most bitter is a scornful jest;
Fate never wounds more deep the gen'rous heart,
Than when a blockhead's insult points the dart.
No pathless waste, or undiscover'd shore?
No secret island in the boundless main?
Quick let us rise, the happy seats explore,
And bear oppression's insolence no more.
This mournful truth is ev'ry where confess'd,
But here more slow, where all are slaves to gold,
Where looks are merchandise, and smiles are sold;
Where won by bribes, by flatteries implor'd,
The groom retails the favours of his lord.
But hark! th' affrighted crowd's tumultuous cries
Roll through the streets, and thunder to the skies:
Rais'd from some pleasing dream of wealth and pow'r,
Some pompous palace, or some blissful bow'r,
Aghast you start, and scarce, with aching sight,
Sustain th' approaching fire's tremendous light;
Swift from pursuing horrours take your way,
And leave your little ALL to flames a prey;
For where can starving merit find a home?
In vain your mournful narrative disclose,
While all neglect, and most insult your woes.
Swift o'er the land the dismal rumour flies,
And publick mournings pacify the skies;
The laureate tribe in venal verse relate,
How virtue wars with persecuting fate;
Refund the plunder of the beggar'd land.
See! while he builds, the gaudy vassals come,
And crowd with sudden wealth the rising dome;
The price of boroughs and of souls restore;
And raise his treasures higher than before.
Now bless'd with all the baubles of the great,
The polish'd marble and the shining plate,
And hopes from angry heav'n another fire.
For the fair banks of Severn or of Trent;
There might'st thou find some elegant retreat,
Some hireling senator's deserted seat;
And stretch thy prospects o'er the smiling land,
For less than rent the dungeons of the Strand;
There prune thy walks, support thy drooping flowers,
Direct thy rivulets, and twine thy bowers;
Despise the dainties of a venal lord:
There ev'ry bush with nature's musick rings;
There ev'ry breeze bears health upon its wings;
On all thy hours security shall smile,
And bless thine evening walk and morning toil.
And sign your will, before you sup from home.
Who sleeps on brambles, till he kills his man;
Some frolick drunkard, reeling from a feast,
Provokes a broil, and stabs you for a jest.
Lords of the street, and terrours of the way;
Flush'd, as they are, with folly, youth, and wine;
Their prudent insults to the poor confine;
Afar they mark the flambeau's bright approach,
And shun the shining train, and golden coach.
And hope the balmy blessings of repose;
Cruel with guilt, and daring with despair,
The midnight murd'rer bursts the faithless bar;
Invades the sacred hour of silent rest,
With hemp the gallows and the fleet supply.
Propose your schemes, ye senatorian band,
Lest ropes be wanting in the tempting spring,
Could half the nation's criminals contain;
Fair justice, then, without constraint ador'd,
No spies were paid, no special juries known,
Blest age! but ah! how different from our own!
The tide, retiring, calls me from the land:
Thou fly'st for refuge to the wilds of Kent;
And, tir'd, like me, with follies and with crimes,
In angry numbers warn'st succeeding times;
Then shall thy friend, nor thou refuse his aid,
Still foe to vice, forsake his Cambrian shade;
In virtue's cause, once more, exert his rage,
Thy satire point, and animate thy page.
Quamvis digressu veteris confusus amici,
Laudo, tamen, vacuis quod sedem figere Cumis
Destinet atque unum civcm donare Sibyllae.
--Ego vel Prochytam praepono Suburae.
Nam quid tam miserum, tam solum vidimus, ut non
Deterius credas horrere incendia, lapsus
Tectorum assiduos, ae mille pericula saevae
Urbis et Augusto recitantes mense poetas
Sed dum tota domus reda componitur una,
Substitit ad veteres arcus--
Hic tunc Umbricius; Quando artibus, inquit, honestis
Nullus in urbe locus, nulla emolumenta laborum,
Res hodie minor est, here quam fuit, atque eadem eras
Deteret exiguis aliquid: proponimus illue
Ire, fatigatas ubi Daedalus exuit alas,
Dum nova canities,--
--et pedibus me
Porto meis, nullo dextram subeunte bacillo.
Cedamus patria: vivant Artorius istic
Et Catulus: maneant, qui nigrum in candida vertunt.
Queis facile est aedem conducere, flumina, portus,
Siccandam eluviem, portandum ad busta cadaver,--
Munera nunc edunt.
Quid Romae faciam? Mentiri nescio: librum,
Si malus est, nequeo laudare et poscere:--
--Ferre ad nuptam, quae mittit adulter,
Quae mandat, norunt alii; me nemo ministro
Fur erit, atque ideo nulli comes exeo,--
Quis nune diligitur, nisi conscius?--
Carus erit Verri, qui Verrem tempore, quo vult,
Acuusare potest.--
--Tanti tibi non sit opaci
Omnis arena Tagi, quodque in mare volvitur aurum,
Ut somno careas--
Quae nunc divitibus gens acceptissima nostris
Et quos praecipue fugiam, properabo fateri.
--Non possum ferre, Quirites,
Graecam urbem:--
Rusticus ille tuus sumit trechedipna, Quirine,
Et ceromatico fert niceteria collo.
Ingenium velox, audacia perdita, sermo
Promptus--
Augur, schoenobates, medicus, magus: omnia novit.
Graeculus esuriens in coelum, jusseris, ibit.
Usque adeo nihil est, quod nostra infantia coelum
Hausit Aventinum?--
Quid? quod adulandi gens prudentissima laudat
Sermonem indocti, faciem deformis amici?
Haec eadem licet et nobis laudare: sed illis
Creditur.--
Natio comoeda est. Rides? majore cachinno
Coneutitur, &c.
Non sumus ergo pares: melior, qui semper et omni
Nocte dieque potest alienum sumere vultum,
A facie jactare manus, laudare paratus,
Si bene ructavit, si rectum minxit amicus.--
Scire volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri.
--Materiam praebet causasque jocorum
Omnibus hic idem, si foeda et scissa lacerna, &c.
Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.--
--Agmine facto,
Debuerant olim tenues migrasse Quirites.
Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi; sed Romae; durior illis
Conatus:--
--Omnia Romaae
Cum pretio.--
Cogimur, et cultis augere peculia servis.
--Ultimus autem
Aerumnae cumulus, quod nudum et frustra rogautem
Nemo cibo, nemo hospitio tectoque juvabit.
Si magna Asturii cecidit domus, horrida mater:
Pullati proccres,--
--Jam accurrit, qui marmora donet,
Conferat impensas: hic &c.
Hic modium argenti. Meliora, ac plura reponit
Persicus orborum lautissimus--
Si potes avelli Circensibus, optima Sorae,
Aut Fabrateriae domus, aut Frusinone paratur,
Quanti nunc tenebras unum conducis in annum.
Hortulus hic--
Vive bidentis amans et culti villicus horti;
Unde epulum possis centum dare Pythagoreis.
--Possis ignavus haberi
Et subiti casus improvidus, ad coenam si
Intestatus eas.--
Ebrius, ac petulans, qui nullum forte cecidit,
Dat poenas, noetem patitur lugentis amicum
Pelidae.--
--Sed, quamvis improbus annis,
Vitari jubet, et comitum longissimus ordo,
Multum praeterca flammarum, atque aenca lampas,
Nec tamen hoc tantum metuas: nam qui spoliet te,
Non deerit, clausis domibus, &c.
Maximus in vinclis ferri modus, ut timeas, ne
Vomer deficiat, ne marrae et sarcula desint.
Felices proavorum atavos, felicia dicas
Saecula, quae quondam sub regibus atque tribunis
Viderunt uno contentam carcere Romam.
His alias poteram, et plures subnectere causas:
Sed jumenta vocant--
--Ergo vale nostri memor et, quoties te
Roma tuo refici properantem reddet Aquino,
Me quoque ad Helvinam Cererem vestramque Dianam
Convelle a Cumis. Satirarum ego, ni pudet illas,
Adjutor gelidos veniam caligatus in agros.
parliament.
American provinces.
modern   manners, though it might be true at Rome. MS. note in Dr.
Johnson's hand-writing.
Hanover.
Survey mankind, from China to Peru;
Remark each anxious toil, each eager strife,
And watch the busy scenes of crowded life;
Then say, how hope and fear, desire and hate
O'erspread with snares the clouded maze of fate,
Where wav'ring man, betray'd by vent'rous pride
To tread the dreary paths, without a guide,
As treach'rous phantoms in the mist delude,
Shuns fancied ills, or chases airy good;
How rarely reason guides the stubborn choice,
Rules the bold hand, or prompts the suppliant voice.
How nations sink, by darling schemes oppress'd,
When vengeance listens to the fool's request.
Fate wings with ev'ry wish th' afflictive dart,
Each gift of nature, and each grace of art;
With fatal heat impetuous courage glows,
With fatal sweetness elocution flows,
Impeachment stops the speaker's pow'rful breath,
And restless fire precipitates on death.
Fall in the gen'ral massacre of gold;
Wide wasting pest! that rages unconfin'd,
And crowds with crimes the records of mankind;
For gold his sword the hireling ruffian draws,
For gold the hireling judge distorts the laws;
Wealth heap'd on wealth, nor truth nor safety buys,
The dangers gather as the treasures rise.
Let hist'ry tell where rival kings command,
And dubious title shakes the madded land,
When statutes glean the refuse of the sword,
How much more safe the vassal than the lord;
Low sculks the hind beneath the rage of power,
Untouch'd his cottage, and his slumbers sound,
The needy traveller, serene and gay,
Walks the wild heath, and sings his toil away.
Does envy seize thee? crush th' upbraiding joy;
Increase his riches, and his peace destroy;
The rustling brake alarms, and quiv'ring shade;
Nor light nor darkness bring his pain relief,
One shows the plunder, and one hides the thief.
And gain and grandeur load the tainted gales:
Few know the toiling statesman's fear or care,
Th' insidious rival, and the gaping heir.
With cheerful wisdom and instructive mirth,
See motley life in modern trappings dress'd,
And feed with varied fools th' eternal jest:
Thou, who could'st laugh where want enchain'd caprice,
Toil crush'd conceit, and man was of a piece;
Where wealth, unlov'd, without a mourner died;
And scarce a sycophant was fed by pride;
Where ne'er was known the form of mock debate,
Or seen a new-made mayor's unwieldy state;
Where change of fav'rites made no change of laws,
And senates heard, before they judg'd a cause;
How would'st thou shake at Britain's modish tribe,
Dart the quick taunt, and edge the piercing gibe?
Attentive truth and nature to descry,
And pierce each scene with philosophick eye;
To thee were solemn toys, or empty show,
The robes of pleasure, and the veils of woe:
All aid the farce, and all thy mirth maintain,
Whose joys are causeless, or whose griefs are vain.
Such was the scorn that fill'd the sage's mind,
Renew'd at ev'ry glance on human kind;
How just that scorn, ere yet thy voice declare,
Search ev'ry state, and canvass ev'ry pray'r.
Athirst for wealth, and burning to be great;
Delusive fortune hears th' incessant call,
They mount, they shine, evaporate, and fall.
On ev'ry stage the foes of peace attend,
Hate dogs their flight, and insult mocks their end.
Love ends with hope, the sinking statesman's door
Pours in the morning worshipper no more;
For growing names the weekly scribbler lies,
To growing wealth the dedicator flies;
From ev'ry room descends the painted face,
That hung the bright palladium of the place;
And, smok'd in kitchens, or in auctions sold,
To better features yields the frame of gold;
For now no more we trace in ev'ry line
Heroick worth, benevolence divine:
The form, distorted, justifies the fall,
And detestation rids th' indignant wall.
But will not Britain hear the last appeal,
Sign her foes' doom, or guard her fav'rites' zeal?
Through freedom's sons no more remonstrance rings,
Degrading nobles and controling kings;
Our supple tribes repress their patriot throats,
And ask no questions but the price of votes;
With weekly libels and septennial ale,
Their wish is full to riot and to rail.
In full-blown dignity, see Wolsey stand,
Law in his voice, and fortune in his hand;
To him the church, the realm their pow'rs consign,
Through him the rays of regal bounty shine;
Turn'd by his nod the stream of honour flows,
His smile alone security bestows.
Still to new heights his restless wishes tow'r,
Claim leads to claim, and pow'r advances pow'r;
Till conquest, unresisted, ceas'd to please,
And rights, submitted, left him none to seize.
At length his sov'reign frowns--the train of state
Mark the keen glance, and watch the sign to hate.
Where'er he turns, he meets a stranger's eye,
His suppliants scorn him, and his followers fly;
Now drops, at once, the pride of awful state,
The golden canopy, the glitt'ring plate,
The regal palace, the luxurious board,
The liv'ried army, and the menial lord.
With age, with cares, with maladies oppress'd,
He seeks the refuge of monastick rest:
Grief aids disease, remember'd folly stings,
And his last sighs reproach the faith of kings.
Speak thou, whose thoughts at humble peace repine,
Shall Wolsey's wealth, with Wolsey's end, be thine?
Or liv'st thou now, with safer pride content,
For, why did Wolsey, near the steeps of fate,
On weak foundations raise th' enormous weight?
Why but to sink beneath misfortune's blow,
With louder ruin to the gulfs below?
And fix'd disease on Harley's closing life?
What murder'd Wentworth, and what exil'd Hyde,
By kings protected, and to kings allied?
What but their wish indulg'd in courts to shine,
And pow'r too great to keep, or to resign?
The young enthusiast quits his ease for fame;
Spreads from the strong contagion of the gown;
O'er Bodley's dome his future labours spread,
Are these thy views? Proceed, illustrious youth,
And virtue guard thee to the throne of truth!
Yet, should thy soul indulge the gen'rous heat
Till captive science yields her last retreat;
Should reason guide thee with her brightest ray,
And pour on misty doubt resistless day;
Should no false kindness lure to loose delight,
Nor praise relax, nor difficulty fright;
Should tempting novelty thy cell refrain,
Should beauty blunt on fops her fatal dart,
Nor claim the triumph of a letter'd heart;
Should no disease thy torpid veins invade,
Nor melancholy's phantoms haunt thy shade;
Yet hope not life, from grief or danger free,
Nor think the doom of man revers'd for thee:
Deign on the passing world to turn thine eyes,
And pause awhile from letters, to be wise;
There mark what ills the scholar's life assail,
See nations, slowly wise and meanly just,
To buried merit raise the tardy bust.
If dreams yet flatter, once again attend,
Nor deem, when learning her last prize bestows,
The glitt'ring eminence exempt from woes;
Rebellion's vengeful talons seize on Laud.
From meaner minds though smaller fines content,
The plunder'd palace, or sequester'd rent;
Mark'd out by dang'rous parts, he meets the shock,
And fatal learning leads him to the block:
Around his tomb let art and genius weep,
But hear his death, ye blockheads, hear and sleep.
The ravish'd standard, and the captive foe,
The senate's thanks, the gazette's pompous tale,
With force resistless o'er the brave prevail.
Such bribes the rapid Greek o'er Asia whirl'd;
For such the steady Romans shook the world;
For such, in distant lands, the Britons shine,
And stain with blood the Danube or the Rhine;
This pow'r has praise, that virtue scarce can warm,
Till fame supplies the universal charm.
Yet reason frowns on war's unequal game,
Where wasted nations raise a single name;
And mortgag'd states, their grandsires' wreaths regret.
From age to age in everlasting debt;
Wreaths which, at last, the dear-bought right convey
To rust on medals, or on stones decay.
How just his hopes, let Swedish Charles decide;
A frame of adamant, a soul of fire,
No dangers fright him, and no labours tire;
Unconquer'd lord of pleasure and of pain;
No joys to him pacifick sceptres yield,
War sounds the trump, he rushes to the field;
Behold surrounding kings their pow'rs combine,
And one capitulate, and one resign;
Peace courts his hand, but spreads her charms in vain;
"Think nothing gain'd," he cries, "till nought remain,
On Moscow's walls till Gothick standards fly,
And all be mine beneath the polar sky."
The march begins in military state,
And nations on his eye suspended wait;
Stern famine guards the solitary coast,
And winter barricades the realm of frost;
He comes, nor want nor cold his course delay;--
Hide, blushing glory, hide Pultowa's day:
The vanquish'd hero leaves his broken bands,
And shows his miseries in distant lands;
Condemn'd a needy supplicant to wait,
While ladies interpose, and slaves debate.
But did not chance, at length, her errour mend?
Did no subverted empire mark his end?
Did rival monarchs give the fatal wound?
Or hostile millions press him to the ground?
His fall was destin'd to a barren strand,
A petty fortress, and a dubious hand;
He left the name, at which the world grew pale,
To point a moral, or adorn a tale.
From Persia's tyrant to Bavaria's lord.
In gay hostility and barb'rous pride,
With half mankind embattl'd at his side,
Great Xerxes comes to seize the certain prey,
And starves exhausted regions in his way;
Attendant flatt'ry counts his myriads o'er,
Till counted myriads sooth his pride no more;
Fresh praise is try'd till madness fires his mind,
The waves he lashes, and enchains the wind,
New pow'rs are claim'd, new pow'rs are still bestow'd,
Till rude resistance lops the spreading god;
The daring Greeks deride the martial show,
And heap their valleys with the gaudy foe;
Th' insulted sea, with humbler thoughts, he gains;
A single skiff to speed his flight remains;
Th' incumber'd oar scarce leaves the dreaded coast
Through purple billows and a floating host.
The bold Bavarian, in a luckless hour,
Tries the dread summits of Caesarean pow'r,
With unexpected legions bursts away,
And sees defenceless realms receive his sway;--
Short sway! fair Austria spreads her mournful charms,
The queen, the beauty, sets the world in arms;
From hill to hill the beacon's rousing blaze
Spreads wide the hope of plunder and of praise;
The fierce Croatian, and the wild Hussar,
The baffled prince, in honour's flatt'ring bloom
Of hasty greatness, finds the fatal doom,
His foes' derision, and his subjects' blame,
And steals to death from anguish and from shame.
In health, in sickness, thus the suppliant prays;
Hides from himself his state, and shuns to know,
That life protracted is protracted woe.
Time hovers o'er, impatient to destroy,
And shuts up all the passages of joy;
In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,
The fruit autumnal, and the vernal flow'r;
With listless eyes the dotard views the store,
He views, and wonders that they please no more;
Now pall the tasteless meats, and joyless wines,
And luxury with sighs her slave resigns.
Approach, ye minstrels, try the soothing strain,
No sounds, alas! would touch th' impervious ear,
Though dancing mountains witness'd Orpheus near;
Nor lute nor lyre his feeble pow'rs attend,
Nor sweeter musick of a virtuous friend;
But everlasting dictates crowd his tongue,
Perversely grave, or positively wrong.
The still returning tale, and ling'ring jest,
Perplex the fawning niece and pamper'd guest,
While growing hopes scarce awe the gath'ring sneer,
And scarce a legacy can bribe to hear;
The watchful guests still hint the last offence;
The daughter's petulance, the son's expense,
Improve his heady rage with treach'rous skill,
And mould his passions till they make his will.
Unnumber'd maladies his joints invade,
Lay siege to life, and press the dire blockade;
But unextinguish'd av'rice still remains,
And dreaded losses aggravate his pains;
He turns, with anxious heart and crippled hands,
His bonds of debt, and mortgages of lands;
Or views his coffers with suspicious eyes,
Unlocks his gold, and counts it till he dies.
But grant, the virtues of a temp'rate prime
Bless with an age exempt from scorn or crime;
And glides in modest innocence away;
Whose peaceful day benevolence endears,
Whose night congratulating conscience cheers;
The gen'ral fav'rite as the gen'ral friend;
Yet e'en on this her load misfortune flings,
To press the weary minutes' flagging wings;
New sorrow rises as the day returns,
A sister sickens, or a daughter mourns.
Now kindred merit fills the sable bier,
Now lacerated friendship claims a tear;
Year chases year, decay pursues decay,
Still drops some joy from with'ring life away;
New forms arise, and diff'rent views engage,
Superfluous lags the vet'ran on the stage,
Till pitying nature signs the last release,
And bids afflicted worth retire to peace.
But few there are whom hours like these await,
Who set unclouded in the gulfs of fate.
From Lydia's monarch should the search descend,
By Solon caution'd to regard his end,
In life's last scene what prodigies surprise,
Fears of the brave, and follies of the wise!
From Marlb'rough's eyes the streams of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driv'ller and a show.
Begs for each birth the fortune of a face;
Yet Vane could tell what ills from beauty spring;
And Sedley curs'd the form that pleas'd a king.
Ye nymphs of rosy lips and radiant eyes,
Whom pleasure keeps too busy to be wise;
Whom joys with soft varieties invite,
By day the frolick, and the dance by night;
Who frown with vanity, who smile with art,
And ask the latest fashion of the heart;
What care, what rules, your heedless charms shall save,
Each nymph your rival, and each youth your slave?
Against your fame with fondness hate combines,
The rival batters, and the lover mines.
With distant voice neglected virtue calls,
Less heard and less, the faint remonstrance falls;
Tir'd with contempt, she quits the slipp'ry reign,
And pride and prudence take her seat in vain.
In crowd at once, where none the pass defend,
The harmless freedom, and the private friend.
The guardians yield, by force superiour ply'd:
To int'rest, prudence; and to flatt'ry, pride.
Here beauty falls, betray'd, despis'd, distress'd,
And hissing infamy proclaims the rest.
Must dull suspense corrupt the stagnant mind?
Must helpless man, in ignorance sedate,
Roll darkling down the torrent of his fate?
Must no dislike alarm, no wishes rise,
No cries invoke the mercies of the skies?
Inquirer, cease; petitions yet remain
Which heav'n may hear; nor deem religion vain.
Still raise for good the supplicating voice,
But leave to heav'n the measure and the choice.
Safe in his pow'r, whose eyes discern afar
The secret ambush of a specious pray'r;
Implore his aid, in his decisions rest,
Secure, whate'er he gives, he gives the best.
Yet, when the sense of sacred presence fires,
Pour forth thy fervours for a healthful mind,
Obedient passions, and a will resign'd;
For love, which scarce collective man can fill;
For patience, sov'reign o'er transmuted ill;
For faith, that, panting for a happier seat,
These goods for man the laws of heav'n ordain;
These goods he grants, who grants the pow'r to gain;
With these celestial wisdom calms the mind,
And makes the happiness she does not find.
allusion to the Scotch lords who suffered for the rebellion in 1745.
_Resistless burns the_ fever of renown,
_Caught_ from the strong contagion of the gown.
Mr. Boswell tells us, that when he remarked to Dr. Johnson, that
there was an awkward repetition of the word spreads in this passage,
he altered it to "Burns from the strong contagion of the gown;" but
this expression, it appears, was only resumed from the reading in
the first edition.
arch over the bridge, will fall, when a man greater than Bacon shall
pass under it. To prevent so shocking an accident, it was pulled
down many years since.
as the rest of the paragraph was in the present tense, he altered it
to scape_s_; but again recollecting that the word _vulgar_
is never used as a singular substantive, he adopted the reading of
the text.
Yet, _with_ the sense of sacred presence _press'd_,
_When_ strong devotion _fills thy glowing breast_.
When learning's triumph o'er her barb'rous foes
First rear'd the stage, immortal Shakespeare rose;
Each change of many-colour'd life he drew,
Exhausted worlds, and then imagin'd new:
Existence saw him spurn her bounded reign,
And panting time toil'd after him in vain:
His pow'rful strokes presiding truth impress'd,
And unresisted passion storm'd the breast.
Then Jonson came, instructed from the school
To please in method, and invent by rule;
His studious patience and laborious art,
By regular approach, assail'd the heart:
Cold approbation gave the ling'ring bays;
For those, who durst not censure, scarce could praise:
A mortal born, he met the gen'ral doom,
But left, like Egypt's kings, a lasting tomb.
The wits of Charles found easier ways to fame,
Nor wish'd for Jonson's art, or Shakespeare's flame:
Themselves they studied, as they felt, they writ;
Intrigue was plot, obscenity was wit;
Vice always found a sympathetick friend;
They pleas'd their age, and did not aim to mend.
Yet bards, like these, aspir'd to lasting praise,
And proudly hop'd to pimp in future days.
Their cause was gen'ral, their supports were strong;
Their slaves were willing, and their reign was long:
Till shame regain'd the post that sense betray'd,
And virtue call'd oblivion to her aid.
Then, crush'd by rules, and weaken'd, as refin'd,
For years the pow'r of tragedy declin'd;
From bard to bard the frigid caution crept,
Till declamation roar'd, while passion slept;
Yet still did virtue deign the stage to tread,
Philosophy remain'd, though nature fled.
But forced, at length, her ancient reign to quit,
She saw great Faustus lay the ghost of wit;
Exulting folly hail'd the joyful day,
And pantomime and song confirm'd her sway.
But who the coming changes can presage,
And mark the future periods of the stage?
Perhaps, if skill could distant times explore,
New Behns, new Durfeys, yet remain in store;
Perhaps, where Lear has ray'd, and Hamlet dy'd,
On flying cars new sorcerers may ride:
Perhaps, (for who can guess th' effects of chance?)
Hard is his lot that, here by fortune plac'd,
Must watch the wild vicissitudes of taste;
With ev'ry meteor of caprice must play,
And chase the new-blown bubbles of the day.
Ah! let not censure term our fate our choice,
The stage but echoes back the publick voice;
The drama's laws the drama's patrons give,
For we that live to please, must please to live.
Then prompt no more the follies you decry,
As tyrants doom their tools of guilt to die;
'Tis yours, this night, to bid the reign commence
Of rescued nature and reviving sense;
To chase the charms of sound, the pomp of show,
For useful mirth and salutary woe;
Bid scenick virtue form the rising age,
And truth diffuse her radiance from the stage.
exhibited at Covent garden theatre the winter before, said to be a
Turk.
The history of this tragedy's composition is interesting, as affording
dates to distinguish Johnson's literary progress. It was begun, and
considerably advanced, while he kept a school at Edial, near Lichfield,
in 1736. In the following year, when he relinquished the task of a
schoolmaster, so little congenial with his mind and disposition, and
resolved to seek his fortunes in the metropolis, Irene was carried along
with him as a foundation for his success. Mr. Walmsley, one of his early
friends, recommended him, and his fellow-adventurer, Garrick, to the
notice and protection of Colson, the mathematician. Unless Mrs. Piozzi
is correct, in rescuing the character of Colson from any identity with
recollection of his first patron's kindness. He was ever warm in
expressions of gratitude for favours, conferred on him in his season of
want and obscurity; and from his deep silence here, we may conclude,
that the recluse mathematician did not evince much sympathy with the
distresses of the young candidate for dramatic fame. Be this, however,
as it may, Johnson, shortly after this introduction, took lodgings at
Greenwich, to proceed with his Irene in quiet and retirement, but soon
returned to Lichfield, to complete it. The same year that saw these
successive disappointments, witnessed also Johnson's return to London,
with his tragedy completed, and its rejection by Fleetwood, the
patentee, at that time, of Drury lane theatre. Twelve years elapsed,
before it was acted, and, after many alterations by his pupil and
companion, Garrick, who was then manager of the theatre, it was, by his
zeal, and the support of the most eminent performers of the day, carried
through a representation of nine nights. Johnson's profits, after the
deduction of expenses, and together with the hundred pounds, which he
received from Robert Dodsley, for the copy, were nearly three hundred
pounds. So fallacious were the hopes cherished by Walmsley, that Johnson
"The tragedy of Irene," says Mr. Murphy, "is founded on a passage in
Knolles's History of the Turks;" an author highly commended in the
Rambler, No. 122. An incident in the life of Mahomet the great, first
emperor of the Turks, is the hinge, on which the fable is made to move.
The substance of the story is shortly this:--In 1453, Mahomet laid siege
to Constantinople, and, having reduced the place, became enamoured of a
fair Greek, whose name was Irene. The sultan invited her to embrace the
law of the prophet, and to grace his throne. Enraged at this intended
marriage, the janizaries formed a conspiracy to dethrone the emperor. To
avert the impending danger, Mahomet, in a full assembly of the grandees,
"catching, with one hand," as Knolles relates it, "the fair Greek by the
hair of her head, and drawing his falchion with the other, he, at one
blow, struck off her head, to the great terror of them all; and, having
so done, said unto them, 'Now, by this, judge whether your emperor is
conceive, in affirming, that there is an interest kept alive in the
plain and simple narrative of the old historian, which is lost in the
declamatory tragedy of Johnson.
It is sufficient, for our present purpose, to confess that he _has_
failed in this his only dramatic attempt; we shall endeavour, more
fully, to show _how_ he has failed, in our discussion of his powers as a
critic. That they were not blinded to the defects of others, by his own
inefficiency in dramatic composition, is fully proved by his judicious
remarks on Cato, which was constructed on a plan similar to Irene: and
the strongest censure, ever passed on this tragedy, was conveyed in
Garrick's application of Johnson's own severe, but correct critique, on
the wits of Charles, in whose works
"Addison speaks the language of poets," says Johnson, in his preface to
Shakespeare, "and Shakespeare of men. We find in Cato innumerable
beauties, which enamour us of its author, but we see nothing that
acquaints us with human sentiments, or human actions; we place it with
the fairest and the noblest progeny which judgment propagates by
conjunction with learning; but Othello is the vigorous and vivacious
offspring of observation, impregnated by genius. Cato affords a splendid
exhibition of artificial and fictitious manners, and delivers just and
noble sentiments, in diction easy, elevated and harmonious; but its
hopes and fears communicate no vibration to the heart: the composition
refers us only to the writer; we pronounce the name of Cato, but we
think on Addison." The critic's remarks on the same tragedy, in his Life
of Addison, are as applicable as the above to his own production. "Cato
is rather a poem in dialogue than a drama; rather a succession of just
sentiments in elegant language, than a representation of natural
affections, or of any state probable or possible in human life. Nothing
here 'excites or assuages emotion:' here is no 'magical power of raising
phantastick terrour or wild anxiety.' The events are expected without
solicitude, and are remembered without joy or sorrow. Of the agents we
have no care; we consider not what they are doing, or what they are
suffering; we wish only to know what they have to say."
But, while we thus pronounce Johnson's failure in the production of
dramatic effect, we will not withhold our tribute of admiration from
Irene, as a moral piece. For, although a remark of Fox's on an
unpublished tragedy of Burke's, that it was rather rhetorical than
poetical, may be applied to the work under consideration; still it
abounds, throughout, with the most elevated and dignified lessons of
morality and virtue. The address of Demetrius to the aged Cali, on the
sentiment and diction.
Lastly, we may consider Irene, as one other illustrious proof, that the
most strict adherence to the far-famed unities, the most harmonious
versification, and the most correct philosophy, will not vie with a
single and simple touch of nature, expressed in simple and artless
language. "But how rich in reputation must that author be, who can spare
Original Composition. Works, vol. v.
Ye glitt'ring train, whom lace and velvet bless,
Suspend the soft solicitudes of dress!
From grov'ling bus'ness and superfluous care,
Ye sons of avarice, a moment spare!
Vot'ries of fame, and worshippers of power,
Dismiss the pleasing phantoms for an hour!
Our daring bard, with spirit unconfin'd,
Spreads wide the mighty moral for mankind.
Learn here, how heaven supports the virtuous mind,
Daring, though calm; and vig'rous, though resign'd;
Learn here, what anguish racks the guilty breast,
In pow'r dependant, in success depress'd.
Learn here, that peace from innocence must flow;
All else is empty sound, and idle show.
If truths, like these, with pleasing language join;
Ennobled, yet unchang'd, if nature shine;
If no wild draught depart from reason's rules;
Nor gods his heroes, nor his lovers fools;
Intriguing wits! his artless plot forgive;
And spare him, beauties! though his lovers live.
Be this, at least, his praise, be this his pride;
To force applause, no modern arts are try'd.
Should partial catcals all his hopes confound,
He bids no trumpet quell the fatal sound.
Should welcome sleep relieve the weary wit,
He rolls no thunders o'er the drowsy pit;
No snares, to captivate the judgment, spreads,
Nor bribes your eyes to prejudice your heads.
Unmov'd, though witlings sneer, and rivals rail,
Studious to please, yet not asham'd to fail,
He scorns the meek address, the suppliant strain,
With merit needless, and without it vain.
In reason, nature, truth, he dares to trust:
Ye fops, be silent: and, ye wits, be just!
MAHOMET,     Emperour of the Turks,  Mr. BARRY.
CALI BASSA,  First vizier,           Mr. BERRY.
MUSTAPHA,    A Turkish aga,          Mr. SOWDEN.
ABDALLA,     An officer,             Mr. HAVARD.
HASAN,     \                      /  Mr. USHER,
Turkish captains,
CARAZA,    /                      \  Mr. BURTON.
DEMETRIUS, \                      /  Mr. GARRICK,
Greek noblemen,
MURZA,       An eunuch,              Mr. KING.
ASPASIA,   \                      /  Mrs. GIBBER,
Greek ladies,
IRENE,     /                      \  Mrs. PRITCHARD.
Attendants on IRENE.
DEMETRIUS _and_ LEONTIUS, _in Turkish habits_.
And, is it thus Demetrius meets his friend,
Hid in the mean disguise of Turkish robes,
With servile secrecy to lurk in shades,
And vent our suff'rings in clandestine groans?
Till breathless fury rested from destruction,
These groans were fatal, these disguises vain:
But, now our Turkish conquerors have quench'd
Their rage, and pall'd their appetite of murder,
No more the glutted sabre thirsts for blood;
And weary cruelty remits her tortures.
Yet Greece enjoys no gleam of transient hope,
No soothing interval of peaceful sorrow:
The lust of gold succeeds the rage of conquest;
--The lust of gold, unfeeling and remorseless,
The last corruption of degen'rate man!
Urg'd by th' imperious soldiers' fierce command,
The groaning Greeks break up their golden caverns,
Pregnant with stores, that India's mines might envy,
Th' accumulated wealth of toiling ages.
That wealth, too sacred for their country's use!
That wealth, too pleasing to be lost for freedom!
That wealth, which, granted to their weeping prince,
Had rang'd embattled nations at our gates!
But, thus reserv'd to lure the wolves of Turkey,
Adds shame to grief, and infamy to ruin.
Lamenting av'rice, now too late, discovers
Her own neglected in the publick safety.
Reproach not misery.--The sons of Greece,
Ill fated race! so oft besieg'd in vain,
With false security beheld invasion.
Why should they fear?--That pow'r that kindly spreads
The clouds, a signal of impending show'rs,
To warn the wand'ring linnet to the shade,
Beheld without concern expiring Greece;
And not one prodigy foretold our fate.
A thousand horrid prodigies foretold it:
A feeble government, eluded laws,
A factious populace, luxurious nobles,
And all the maladies of sinking states.
When publick villany, too strong for justice,
Shows his bold front, the harbinger of ruin,
Can brave Leontius call for airy wonders,
Which cheats interpret, and which fools regard?
When some neglected fabrick nods beneath
The weight of years, and totters to the tempest,
Must heav'n despatch the messengers of light,
Or wake the dead, to warn us of its fall?
Well might the weakness of our empire sink
Before such foes of more than human force:
Some pow'r invisible, from heav'n or hell,
Conducts their armies, and asserts their cause.
And yet, my friend, what miracles were wrought
Beyond the pow'r of constancy and courage?
Did unresisted lightning aid their cannon?
Did roaring whirlwinds sweep us from the ramparts?
'Twas vice that shook our nerves, 'twas vice, Leontius,
That froze our veins, and wither'd all our pow'rs.
Whate'er our crimes, our woes demand compassion.
Each night, protected by the friendly darkness,
Quitting my close retreat, I range the city,
And, weeping, kiss the venerable ruins;
With silent pangs, I view the tow'ring domes,
Sacred to pray'r; and wander through the streets,
Where commerce lavish'd unexhausted plenty,
And jollity maintain'd eternal revels--
--How chang'd, alas!--Now ghastly desolation,
In triumph, sits upon our shatter'd spires;
Now superstition, ignorance, and errour,
Usurp our temples, and profane our altars.
From ev'ry palace bursts a mingled clamour,
The dreadful dissonance of barb'rous triumph,
Shrieks of affright, and waitings of distress.
Oft when the cries of violated beauty
Arose to heav'n, and pierc'd my bleeding breast,
I felt thy pains, and trembled for Aspasia.
Aspasia!--spare that lov'd, that mournful name:
Dear, hapless maid--tempestuous grief o'erbears
My reasoning pow'rs--Dear, hapless, lost Aspasia!
Suspend the thought.
All thought on her is madness;
Yet let me think--I see the helpless maid;
Behold the monsters gaze with savage rapture,
Behold how lust and rapine struggle round her!
Awake, Demetrius, from this dismal dream;
Sink not beneath imaginary sorrows;
Call to your aid your courage and your wisdom;
Think on the sudden change of human scenes;
Think on the various accidents of war;
Think on the mighty pow'r of awful virtue;
Think on that providence that guards the good.
O providence! extend thy care to me;
For courage droops, unequal to the combat;
And weak philosophy denies her succours.
Sure, some kind sabre in the heat of battle,
Ere yet the foe found leisure to be cruel,
Dismiss'd her to the sky.
Some virgin martyr,
Perhaps, enamour'd of resembling virtue,
With gentle hand, restrain'd the streams of life,
And snatch'd her timely from her country's fate.
From those bright regions of eternal day,
Where now thou shin'st among thy fellow-saints,
Array'd in purer light, look down on me:
In pleasing visions and assuasive dreams,
O! sooth my soul, and teach me how to lose thee.
Enough of unavailing tears, Demetrius:
I come obedient to thy friendly summons,
And hop'd to share thy counsels, not thy sorrows:
While thus we mourn the fortune of Aspasia,
To what are we reserv'd?
To what I know not:
But hope, yet hope, to happiness and honour;
If happiness can be, without Aspasia.
But whence this new-sprung hope?
From Cali bassa,
The chief, whose wisdom guides the Turkish counsels.
He, tir'd of slav'ry, though the highest slave,
Projects, at once, our freedom and his own;
And bids us, thus disguis'd, await him here.
Can he restore the state he could not save?
In vain, when Turkey's troops assail'd our walls,
His kind intelligence betray'd their measures;
Their arms prevail'd, though Cali was our friend.
When the tenth sun had set upon our sorrows,
At midnight's private hour, a voice unknown
Sounds in my sleeping ear, 'Awake, Demetrius,
Awake, and follow me to better fortunes.'
Surpris'd I start, and bless the happy dream;
Then, rousing, know the fiery chief Abdalla,
Whose quick impatience seiz'd my doubtful hand,
And led me to the shore where Cali stood,
Pensive, and list'ning to the beating surge.
There, in soft hints, and in ambiguous phrase,
With all the diffidence of long experience,
That oft had practis'd fraud, and oft detected,
The vet'ran courtier half reveal'd his project.
By his command, equipp'd for speedy flight,
Deep in a winding creek a galley lies,
Mann'd with the bravest of our fellow-captives,
Selected by my care, a hardy band,
That long to hail thee chief.
But what avails
So small a force? or, why should Cali fly?
Or, how can Call's flight restore our country?
Reserve these questions for a safer hour;
Or hear himself, for see the bassa comes.
Now summon all thy soul, illustrious Christian!
Awake each faculty that sleeps within thee:
The courtier's policy, the sage's firmness,
The warriour's ardour, and the patriot's zeal.
If, chasing past events with vain pursuit,
Or wand'ring in the wilds of future being,
A single thought now rove, recall it home.--
But can thy friend sustain the glorious cause,
The cause of liberty, the cause of nations?
Observe him closely, with a statesman's eye,
Thou, that hast long perus'd the draughts of nature,
And know'st the characters of vice and virtue,
Left by the hand of heav'n on human clay.
His mien is lofty, his demeanour great;
Nor sprightly folly wantons in his air;
Nor dull serenity becalms his eyes.
Such had I trusted once, as soon as seen,
But cautious age suspects the flatt'ring form,
And only credits what experience tells.
Has silence press'd her seal upon his lips?
Does adamantine faith invest his heart?
Will he not bend beneath a tyrant's frown?
Will he not melt before ambition's fire?
Will he not soften in a friend's embrace?
Or flow dissolving in a woman's tears?
Sooner the trembling leaves shall find a voice,
And tell the secrets of their conscious walks;
Sooner the breeze shall catch the flying sounds,
And shock the tyrant with a tale of treason.
Your slaughter'd multitudes, that swell the shore
With monuments of death, proclaim his courage;
Virtue and liberty engross his soul,
And leave no place for perfidy, or fear.
I scorn a trust unwillingly repos'd;
Demetrius will not lead me to dishonour;
Consult in private, call me, when your scheme
Leontius, stay.
Forgive an old man's weakness,
And share the deepest secrets of my soul,
My wrongs, my fears, my motives, my designs.--
When unsuccessful wars, and civil factions
Embroil'd the Turkish state, our sultan's father,
Great Amurath, at my request, forsook
The cloister's ease, resum'd the tott'ring throne,
And snatch'd the reins of abdicated pow'r
From giddy Mahomet's unskilful hand.
This fir'd the youthful king's ambitious breast:
He murmurs vengeance, at the name of Cali,
And dooms my rash fidelity to ruin.
Unhappy lot of all that shine in courts,
For forc'd compliance, or for zealous virtue,
Still odious to the monarch, or the people.
Such are the woes, when arbitrary pow'r
And lawless passion hold the sword of justice.
If there be any land, as fame reports,
Where common laws restrain the prince and subject,
A happy land, where circulating pow'r
Flows through each member of th' embodied state;
Sure, not unconscious of the mighty blessing,
Her grateful sons shine bright with every virtue;
Untainted with the lust of innovation,
Sure, all unite to hold her league of rule
Unbroken, as the sacred chain of nature
That links the jarring elements in peace.
But say, great bassa, why the sultan's anger,
Burning in vain, delays the stroke of death?
Young, and unsettled in his father's kingdoms,
Fierce as he was, he dreaded to destroy
The empire's darling, and the soldier's boast;
But now confirm'd, and swelling with his conquests,
Secure, he tramples my declining fame,
Frowns unrestrain'd, and dooms me with his eyes.
What can reverse thy doom?
The tyrant's death.
But Greece is still forgot.
On Asia's coast,
Which lately bless'd my gentle government,
Soon as the sultan's unexpected fate
Fills all th' astonish'd empire with confusion,
My policy shall raise an easy throne;
The Turkish pow'rs from Europe shall retreat,
And harass Greece no more with wasteful war.
A galley mann'd with Greeks, thy charge, Leontius,
Attends to waft us to repose and safety.
That vessel, if observ'd, alarms the court,
And gives a thousand fatal questions birth:
Why stor'd for flight? and why prepar'd by Cali?
This hour I'll beg, with unsuspecting face,
Leave to perform my pilgrimage to Mecca;
Which granted, hides my purpose from the world,
And, though refus'd, conceals it from the sultan.
How can a single hand attempt a life,
Which armies guard, and citadels enclose?
Forgetful of command, with captive beauties,
Far from his troops, he toys his hours away.
A roving soldier seiz'd, in Sophia's temple,
A virgin, shining with distinguish'd charms,
And brought his beauteous plunder to the sultan--
In Sophia's temple!--What alarm!--Proceed.
The sultan gaz'd, he wonder'd, and he lov'd:
In passion lost, he bade the conqu'ring fair
Renounce her faith, and be the queen of Turkey.
The pious maid, with modest indignation,
Threw back the glitt'ring bribe.
Celestial goodness!
It must, it must be she;--her name?
Aspasia.
What hopes, what terrours, rush upon my soul!
O lead me quickly to the scene of fate;
Break through the politician's tedious forms;
Aspasia calls me, let me fly to save her.
Did Mahomet reproach, or praise her virtue?
His offers, oft repeated, still refus'd,
At length rekindled his accustomed fury,
And chang'd th' endearing smile, and am'rous whisper
To threats of torture, death, and violation.
These tedious narratives of frozen age
Distract my soul;--despatch thy ling'ring tale;
Say, did a voice from heav'n restrain the tyrant?
Did interposing angels guard her from him?
Just in the moment of impending fate,
Another plund'rer brought the bright Irene;
Of equal beauty, but of softer mien,
Fear in her eye, submission on her tongue,
Her mournful charms attracted his regards,
Disarm'd his rage, and, in repeated visits,
Gain'd all his heart; at length, his eager love
To her transferr'd the offer of a crown,
Nor found again the bright temptation fail?
Trembling to grant, nor daring to refuse,
While heav'n and Mahomet divide her fears,
With coy caresses and with pleasing wiles
She feeds his hopes, and sooths him to delay.
For her, repose is banish'd from the night,
And bus'ness from the day: in her apartments
He lives--
And there must fall.
But yet, th' attempt
Is hazardous.
Forbear to speak of hazards;
What has the wretch, that has surviv'd his country,
His friends, his liberty, to hazard?
Life.
Th' inestimable privilege of breathing!
Important hazard! What's that airy bubble,
When weigh'd with Greece, with virtue, with Aspasia?--
A floating atom, dust that falls, unheeded,
Into the adverse scale, nor shakes the balance.
At least, this day be calm--If we succeed,
Aspasia's thine, and all thy life is rapture.--
See! Mustapha, the tyrant's minion, comes;
Invest Leontius with his new command;
And wait Abdalla's unsuspected visits:
Remember freedom, glory, Greece, and love.
By what enchantment does this lovely Greek
Hold in her chains the captivated sultan?
He tires his fav'rites with Irene's praise,
And seeks the shades to muse upon Irene;
Irene steals, unheeded, from his tongue,
And mingles, unperceiv'd, with ev'ry thought.
Why should the sultan shun the joys of beauty,
Or arm his breast against the force of love?
Love, that with sweet vicissitude relieves
The warriour's labours and the monarch's cares.
But, will she yet receive the faith of Mecca?
Those pow'rful tyrants of the female breast,
Fear and ambition, urge her to compliance;
Dress'd in each charm of gay magnificence,
Alluring grandeur courts her to his arms,
Religion calls her from the wish'd embrace,
Paints future joys, and points to distant glories.
Soon will th' unequal contest be decided.
Prospects, obscur'd by distance, faintly strike;
Each pleasure brightens, at its near approach,
And ev'ry danger shocks with double horrour.
How shall I scorn the beautiful apostate!
How will the bright Aspasia shine above her!
Should she, for proselytes are always zealous,
With pious warmth receive our prophet's law--
Heav'n will contemn the mercenary fervour,
Which love of greatness, not of truth, inflames.
Cease, cease thy censures; for the sultan comes
Alone, with am'rous haste to seek his love.
Hail! terrour of the monarchs of the world;
Unshaken be thy throne, as earth's firm base;
Live, till the sun forgets to dart his beams,
And weary planets loiter in their courses!
But, Cali, let Irene share thy prayers;
For what is length of days, without Irene?
I come from empty noise, and tasteless pomp,
From crowds, that hide a monarch from himself,
To prove the sweets of privacy and friendship,
And dwell upon the beauties of Irene.
O may her beauties last, unchang'd by time,
As those that bless the mansions of the good!
Each realm, where beauty turns the graceful shape,
Swells the fair breast, or animates the glance,
Adorns my palace with its brightest virgins;
Yet, unacquainted with these soft emotions,
I walk'd superiour through the blaze of charms,
Prais'd without rapture, left without regret.
Why rove I now, when absent from my fair,
From solitude to crowds, from crowds to solitude,
Still restless, till I clasp the lovely maid,
And ease my loaded soul upon her bosom?
Forgive, great sultan, that intrusive duty
Inquires the final doom of Menodorus,
The Grecian counsellor.
Go, see him die;
His martial rhet'rick taught the Greeks resistance;
Had they prevail'd, I ne'er had known Irene.
Remote from tumult, in th' adjoining palace,
Thy care shall guard this treasure of my soul:
There let Aspasia, since my fair entreats it,
With converse chase the melancholy moments.
Sure, chill'd with sixty winter camps, thy blood,
At sight of female charms, will glow no more.
These years, unconquer'd Mahomet, demand
Desires more pure, and other cares than love.
Long have I wish'd, before our prophet's tomb,
To pour my pray'rs for thy successful reign,
To quit the tumults of the noisy camp,
And sink into the silent grave in peace.
What! think of peace, while haughty Scanderbeg,
Elate with conquest, in his native mountains,
Prowls o'er the wealthy spoils of bleeding Turkey!
While fair Hungaria's unexhausted valleys
Pour forth their legions; and the roaring Danube
Rolls half his floods, unheard, through shouting camps!
Nor could'st thou more support a life of sloth
Than Amurath--
Than Amurath, accustom'd to command,
Could bear his son upon the Turkish throne.
This pilgrimage our lawgiver ordain'd--
For those, who could not please by nobler service.--
Our warlike prophet loves an active faith.
The holy flame of enterprising virtue
Mocks the dull vows of solitude and penance,
And scorns the lazy hermit's cheap devotion.
Shine thou, distinguish'd by superiour merit;
With wonted zeal pursue the task of war,
Till ev'ry nation reverence the koran,
And ev'ry suppliant lift his eyes to Mecca.
This regal confidence, this pious ardour,
Let prudence moderate, though not suppress.
Is not each realm, that smiles with kinder suns,
Or boasts a happier soil, already thine?
Extended empire, like expanded gold,
Exchanges solid strength for feeble splendour.
Preach thy dull politicks to vulgar kings,
Thou know'st not yet thy master's future greatness,
His vast designs, his plans of boundless pow'r.
When ev'ry storm in my domain shall roar,
When ev'ry wave shall beat a Turkish shore;
Then, Cali, shall the toils of battle cease,
Then dream of pray'r, and pilgrimage, and peace.
Aspasia, yet pursue the sacred theme;
Exhaust the stores of pious eloquence,
And teach me to repel the sultan's passion.
Still, at Aspasia's voice, a sudden rapture
Exalts my soul, and fortifies my heart;
The glitt'ring vanities of empty greatness,
The hopes and fears, the joys and pains of life,
Dissolve in air, and vanish into nothing.
Let nobler hopes and juster fears succeed,
And bar the passes of Irene's mind
Against returning guilt.
When thou art absent,
Death rises to my view, with all his terrours;
Then visions, horrid as a murd'rer's dreams,
Chill my resolves, and blast my blooming virtue:
Stern torture shakes his bloody scourge before me,
And anguish gnashes on the fatal wheel.
Since fear predominates in ev'ry thought,
And sways thy breast with absolute dominion,
Think on th' insulting scorn, the conscious pangs,
The future mis'ries, that wait th' apostate;
So shall timidity assist thy reason,
And wisdom into virtue turn thy frailty.
Will not that pow'r, that form'd the heart of woman,
And wove the feeble texture of her nerves,
Forgive those fears that shake the tender frame?
The weakness we lament, ourselves create;
Instructed, from our infant years, to court,
With counterfeited fears, the aid of man,
We learn to shudder at the rustling breeze,
Start at the light, and tremble in the dark;
Till, affectation ripening to belief,
And folly, frighted at her own chimeras,
Habitual cowardice usurps the soul.
Not all, like thee, can brave the shocks of fate.
Thy soul, by nature great, enlarg'd by knowledge,
Soars unincumber'd with our idle cares,
And all Aspasia, but her beauty's man.
Each gen'rous sentiment is thine, Demetrius,
Whose soul, perhaps, yet mindful of Aspasia,
Now hovers o'er this melancholy shade,
Well pleas'd to find thy precepts not forgotten.
Oh! could the grave restore the pious hero,
Soon would his art or valour set us free,
And bear us far from servitude and crimes.
He yet may live.
Alas! delusive dream!
Too well I know him; his immoderate courage,
Th' impetuous sallies of excessive virtue,
Too strong for love, have hurried him on death.
CALI _to_ ABDALLA, _as they advance_.
Behold our future sultaness, Abdalla;--
Let artful flatt'ry now, to lull suspicion,
Glide, through Irene, to the sultan's ear.
Would'st thou subdue th' obdurate cannibal
To tender friendship, praise him to his mistress.
Well may those eyes, that view these heav'nly charms,
Reject the daughters of contending kings;
For what are pompous titles, proud alliance,
Empire or wealth, to excellence like thine?
Receive th' impatient sultan to thy arms;
And may a long posterity of monarchs,
The pride and terrour of succeeding days,
Rise from the happy bed; and future queens
Diffuse Irene's beauty through the world!
Can Mahomet's imperial hand descend
To clasp a slave? or can a soul, like mine,
Unus'd to pow'r, and form'd for humbler scenes,
Support the splendid miseries of greatness?
No regal pageant, deck'd with casual honours,
Scorn'd by his subjects, trampled by his foes;
No feeble tyrant of a petty state,
Courts thee to shake on a dependant throne;
Born to command, as thou to charm mankind,
The sultan from himself derives his greatness.
Observe, bright maid, as his resistless voice
Drives on the tempest of destructive war,
How nation after nation falls before him.
At his dread name the distant mountains shake
Their cloudy summits, and the sons of fierceness,
That range uncivilized from rock to rock,
Distrust th' eternal fortresses of nature,
And wish their gloomy caverns more obscure.
Forbear this lavish pomp of dreadful praise;
The horrid images of war and slaughter
Renew our sorrows, and awake our fears.
Cali, methinks yon waving trees afford
A doubtful glimpse of our approaching friends;
Just as I mark'd them, they forsook the shore,
And turn'd their hasty steps towards the garden.
Conduct these queens, Abdalla, to the palace:
Such heav'nly beauty, form'd for adoration,
The pride of monarchs, the reward of conquest!
Such beauty must not shine to vulgar eyes.
CALI, _solus_.
How heav'n, in scorn of human arrogance,
Commits to trivial chance the fate of nations!
While, with incessant thought, laborious man
Extends his mighty schemes of wealth and pow'r,
And towers and triumphs in ideal greatness;
Some accidental gust of opposition
Blasts all the beauties of his new creation,
O'erturns the fabrick of presumptuous reason,
And whelms the swelling architect beneath it.
Had not the breeze untwin'd the meeting boughs,
And, through the parted shade, disclos'd the Greeks,
Th' important hour had pass'd, unheeded, by,
In all the sweet oblivion of delight,
In all the fopperies of meeting lovers;
In sighs and tears, in transports and embraces,
In soft complaints, and idle protestations.
Could omens fright the resolute and wise,
Well might we fear impending disappointments.
Your artful suit, your monarch's fierce denial,
The cruel doom of hapless Menodorus--
And your new charge, that dear, that heav'nly maid--
All this we know already from Abdalla.
Such slight defeats but animate the brave
To stronger efforts and maturer counsels.
My doom confirm'd establishes my purpose.
Calmly he heard, till Amurath's resumption
Rose to his thought, and set his soul on fire:
When from his lips the fatal name burst out,
A sudden pause th' imperfect sense suspended,
Like the dread stillness of condensing storms.
The loudest cries of nature urge us forward;
Despotick rage pursues the life of Cali;
His groaning country claims Leontius' aid;
And yet another voice, forgive me, Greece,
The pow'rful voice of love, inflames Demetrius;
Each ling'ring hour alarms me for Aspasia.
What passions reign among thy crew, Leontius?
Does cheerless diffidence oppress their hearts?
Or sprightly hope exalt their kindling spirits?
Do they, with pain, repress the struggling shout,
And listen eager to the rising wind?
All there is hope, and gaiety, and courage,
No cloudy doubts, or languishing delays;
Ere I could range them on the crowded deck,
At once a hundred voices thunder'd round me,
And ev'ry voice was liberty and Greece.
Swift let us rush upon the careless tyrant,
Nor give him leisure for another crime.
Then let us now resolve, nor idly waste
Another hour in dull deliberation.
But see, where destin'd to protract our counsels,
Comes Mustapha.--Your Turkish robes conceal you.
Retire with speed, while I prepare to meet him
With artificial smiles, and seeming friendship.
I see the gloom, that low'rs upon thy brow;
These days of love and pleasure charm not thee;
Too slow these gentle constellations roll;
Thou long'st for stars, that frown on human kind,
And scatter discord from their baleful beams.
How blest art thou, still jocund and serene,
Beneath the load of business, and of years!
Sure, by some wond'rous sympathy of souls,
My heart still beats responsive to the sultan's;
I share, by secret instinct, all his joys,
And feel no sorrow, while my sov'reign smiles.
The sultan comes, impatient for his love;
Conduct her hither; let no rude intrusion
Molest these private walks, or care invade
These hours, assign'd to pleasure and Irene.
Now, Mustapha, pursue thy tale of horrour.
Has treason's dire infection reach'd my palace?
Can Cali dare the stroke of heav'nly justice,
In the dark precincts of the gaping grave,
And load with perjuries his parting soul?
Was it for this, that, sick'ning in Epirus,
My father call'd me to his couch of death,
Join'd Cali's hand to mine, and falt'ring cried,
Restrain the fervour of impetuous youth
With venerable Cali's faithful counsels?
Are these the counsels, this the faith of Cali?
Were all our favours lavish'd on a villain?
Confest?--
Confest by dying Menodorus.
In his last agonies, the gasping coward,
Amidst the tortures of the burning steel,
Still fond of life, groan'd out the dreadful secret,
Held forth this fatal scroll, then sunk to nothing.
MAHOMET. _examining the paper_.
His correspondence with our foes of Greece!
His hand! his seal! The secrets of my soul,
Conceal'd from all but him! All, all conspire
To banish doubt, and brand him for a villain!
Our schemes for ever cross'd, our mines discover'd,
Betray'd some traitor lurking near my bosom.
Oft have I rag'd, when their wide-wasting cannon
Lay pointed at our batt'ries yet unform'd,
And broke the meditated lines of war.
Detested Cali, too, with artful wonder,
Would shake his wily head, and closely whisper,
Beware of Mustapha, beware of treason.
The faith of Mustapha disdains suspicion;
But yet, great emperour, beware of treason;
Th' insidious bassa, fir'd by disappointment--
Shall feel the vengeance of an injur'd king.
Go, seize him, load him with reproachful chains;
Before th' assembled troops, proclaim his crimes;
Then leave him, stretch'd upon the ling'ring rack,
Amidst the camp to howl his life away.
Should we, before the troops, proclaim his crimes,
I dread his arts of seeming innocence,
His bland address, and sorcery of tongue;
And, should he fall, unheard, by sudden justice,
Th' adoring soldiers would revenge their idol.
Cali, this day, with hypocritick zeal,
Implor'd my leave to visit Mecca's temple;
Struck with the wonder of a statesman's goodness,
I rais'd his thoughts to more sublime devotion.
Now let him go, pursu'd by silent wrath,
Meet unexpected daggers in his way,
And, in some distant land, obscurely die.
There will his boundless wealth, the spoil of Asia,
Heap'd by your father's ill-plac'd bounties on him,
Disperse rebellion through the eastern world;
Bribe to his cause, and list beneath his banners,
Arabia's roving troops, the sons of swiftness,
And arm the Persian heretick against thee;
There shall he waste thy frontiers, check thy conquests,
And, though at length subdued, elude thy vengeance.
Elude my vengeance! No--My troops shall range
Th' eternal snows that freeze beyond Maeotis,
And Africk's torrid sands, in search of Cali.
Should the fierce north, upon his frozen wings,
Bear him aloft, above the wond'ring clouds,
And seat him in the pleiads' golden chariots,
Thence shall my fury drag him down to tortures;
Wherever guilt can fly, revenge can follow.
Wilt thou dismiss the savage from the toils,
Only to hunt him round the ravag'd world?
Suspend his sentence--Empire and Irene
Claim my divided soul. This wretch, unworthy
To mix with nobler cares, I'll throw aside
For idle hours, and crush him at my leisure.
Let not th' unbounded greatness of his mind
Betray my king to negligence of danger.
Perhaps, the clouds of dark conspiracy
Now roll, full fraught with thunder, o'er your head.
Twice, since the morning rose, I saw the bassa,
Like a fell adder swelling in a brake,
Beneath the covert of this verdant arch,
In private conference; beside him stood
Two men unknown, the partners of his bosom;
I mark'd them well, and trac'd in either face
The gloomy resolution, horrid greatness,
And stern composure, of despairing heroes;
And, to confirm my thoughts, at sight of me,
As blasted by my presence, they withdrew,
With all the speed of terrour and of guilt.
The strong emotions of my troubled soul
Allow no pause for art or for contrivance;
And dark perplexity distracts my counsels.
Do thou resolve: for, see, Irene comes!
At her approach each ruder gust of thought
Sinks, like the sighing of a tempest spent,
And gales of softer passion fan my bosom.
Mustapha.
Wilt thou descend, fair daughter of perfection,
To hear my vows, and give mankind a queen?
Ah! cease, Irene, cease those flowing sorrows,
That melt a heart impregnable till now,
And turn thy thoughts, henceforth, to love and empire.
How will the matchless beauties of Irene,
Thus bright in tears, thus amiable in ruin,
With all the graceful pride of greatness heighten'd,
Amidst the blaze of jewels and of gold,
Adorn a throne, and dignify dominion!
Why all this glare of splendid eloquence,
To paint the pageantries of guilty state?
Must I, for these, renounce the hope of heav'n,
Immortal crowns, and fulness of enjoyment?
Vain raptures all--For your inferiour natures,
Form'd to delight, and happy by delighting,
Heav'n has reserv'd no future paradise,
But bids you rove the paths of bliss, secure
Of total death, and careless of hereafter;
While heaven's high minister, whose awful volume
Records each act, each thought of sov'reign man,
Surveys your plays with inattentive glance,
And leaves the lovely trifler unregarded.
Why then has nature's vain munificence
Profusely pour'd her bounties upon woman?
Whence, then, those charms thy tongue has deign'd to flatter,
That air resistless, and enchanting blush,
Unless the beauteous fabrick was design'd
A habitation for a fairer soul?
Too high, bright maid, thou rat'st exteriour grace:
Not always do the fairest flow'rs diffuse
The richest odours, nor the speckled shells
Conceal the gem; let female arrogance
Observe the feather'd wand'rers of the sky;
With purple varied, and bedrop'd with gold,
They prune the wing, and spread the glossy plumes,
Ordain'd, like you, to flutter and to shine,
And cheer the weary passenger with musick.
Mean as we are, this tyrant of the world
Implores our smiles, and trembles at our feet.
Whence flow the hopes and fears, despair and rapture,
Whence all the bliss and agonies of love?
Why, when the balm of sleep descends on man,
Do gay delusions, wand'ring o'er the brain,
Sooth the delighted soul with empty bliss?
To want, give affluence? and to slav'ry, freedom?
Such are love's joys, the lenitives of life,
A fancy'd treasure, and a waking dream.
Then let me once, in honour of our sex,
Assume the boastful arrogance of man.
Th' attractive softness, and th' endearing smile,
And pow'rful glance, 'tis granted, are our own;
Nor has impartial nature's frugal hand
Exhausted all her nobler gifts on you.
Do not we share the comprehensive thought,
Th' enlivening wit, the penetrating reason?
Beats not the female breast with gen'rous passions,
The thirst of empire, and the love of glory?
Illustrious maid, new wonders fix me thine;
Thy soul completes the triumphs of thy face.
I thought (forgive, my fair,) the noblest aim,
The strongest effort of a female soul,
Was but to choose the graces of the day;
To tune the tongue, to teach the eyes to roll,
Dispose the colours of the flowing robe,
And add new roses to the faded cheek.
Will it not charm a mind, like thine, exalted,
To shine, the goddess of applauding nations;
To scatter happiness and plenty round thee,
To bid the prostrate captive rise and live,
To see new cities tow'r, at thy command,
And blasted kingdoms flourish, at thy smile?
Charm'd with the thought of blessing human kind,
Too calm I listen to the flatt'ring sounds.
O! seize the power to bless--Irene's nod
Shall break the fetters of the groaning Christian;
Greece, in her lovely patroness secure,
Shall mourn no more her plunder'd palaces.
Forbear--O! do not urge me to my ruin!
To state and pow'r I court thee, not to ruin:
Smile on my wishes, and command the globe.
Security shall spread her shield before thee,
And love infold thee with his downy wings.
If greatness please thee, mount th' imperial seat;
If pleasure charm thee, view this soft retreat;
Here ev'ry warbler of the sky shall sing;
Here ev'ry fragrance breathe of ev'ry spring:
To deck these bow'rs each region shall combine,
And e'en our prophet's gardens envy thine:
Empire and love shall share the blissful day,
And varied life steal, unperceiv'd, away.
Is this the fierce conspirator, Abdalla?
Is this the restless diligence of treason?
Where hast thou linger'd, while th' incumber'd hours
Fly, lab'ring with the fate of future nations,
And hungry slaughter scents imperial blood?
Important cares detain'd me from your counsels.
Some petty passion! some domestick trifle!
Some vain amusement of a vacant soul!
A weeping wife, perhaps, or dying friend,
Hung on your neck, and hinder'd your departure.
Is this a time for softness or for sorrow?
Unprofitable, peaceful, female virtues!
When eager vengeance shows a naked foe,
And kind ambition points the way to greatness.
Must then ambition's votaries infringe
The laws of kindness, break the bonds of nature,
And quit the names of brother, friend, and father?
This sov'reign passion, scornful of restraint,
E'en from the birth, affects supreme command,
Swells in the breast, and, with resistless force,
O'erbears each gentler motion of the mind:
As, when a deluge overspreads the plains,
The wand'ring rivulet, and silver lake,
Mix undistinguish'd with the gen'ral roar.
Yet can ambition, in Abdalla's breast,
Claim but the second place: there mighty love
Has fix'd his hopes, inquietudes, and fears,
His glowing wishes, and his jealous pangs.
Love is, indeed, the privilege of youth;
Yet, on a day like this, when expectation
Pants for the dread event--But let us reason--
Hast thou grown old, amidst the crowd of courts,
And turn'd th' instructive page of human life,
To cant, at last, of reason to a lover?
Such ill-tim'd gravity, such serious folly,
Might well befit the solitary student,
Th' unpractis'd dervis, or sequester'd faquir.
Know'st thou not yet, when love invades the soul,
That all her faculties receive his chains?
That reason gives her sceptre to his hand,
Or only struggles to be more enslav'd?
Aspasia, who can look upon thy beauties?
Who hear thee speak, and not abandon reason?
Reason! the hoary dotard's dull directress,
That loses all, because she hazards nothing!
Reason! the tim'rous pilot, that, to shun
The rocks of life, for ever flies the port!
But why this sudden warmth?
Because I love:
Because my slighted passion burns in vain!
Why roars the lioness, distress'd by hunger?
Why foam the swelling waves, when tempests rise?
Why shakes the ground, when subterraneous fires
Fierce through the bursting caverns rend their way?
Not till this day, thou saw'st this fatal fair;
Did ever passion make so swift a progress?
Once more reflect; suppress this infant folly.
Gross fires, enkindled by a mortal hand,
Spread, by degrees, and dread th' oppressing stream;
The subtler flames, emitted from the sky,
Flash out at once, with strength above resistance.
How did Aspasia welcome your address?
Did you proclaim this unexpected conquest?
Or pay, with speaking eyes, a lover's homage?
Confounded, aw'd, and lost in admiration,
I gaz'd, I trembled; but I could not speak;
When e'en, as love was breaking off from wonder,
And tender accents quiver'd on my lips,
She mark'd my sparkling eyes, and heaving breast,
And smiling, conscious of her charms, withdrew.
Now be, some moments, master of thyself;
Nor let Demetrius know thee for a rival.
Hence! or be calm--To disagree is ruin.
When will occasion smile upon our wishes,
And give the tortures of suspense a period?
Still must we linger in uncertain hope?
Still languish in our chains, and dream of freedom,
Like thirsty sailors gazing on the clouds,
Till burning death shoots through their wither'd limbs?
Deliverance is at hand; for Turkey's tyrant,
Sunk in his pleasures, confident and gay,
With all the hero's dull security,
Trusts to my care his mistress and his life,
And laughs, and wantons in the jaws of death.
So weak is man, when destin'd to destruction!--
The watchful slumber, and the crafty trust.
At my command, yon iron gates unfold;
At my command, the sentinels retire;
With all the license of authority,
Through bowing slaves, I range the private rooms,
And of to-morrow's action fix the scene.
To-morrow's action! Can that hoary wisdom,
Borne down with years, still dote upon to-morrow?
That fatal mistress of the young, the lazy,
The coward, and the fool, condemn'd to lose
An useless life, in waiting for to-morrow,
To gaze with longing eyes upon to-morrow,
Till interposing death destroys the prospect!
Strange! that this gen'ral fraud, from day to day,
Should fill the world with wretches undetected.
The soldier, lab'ring through a winter's march,
Still sees to-morrow drest in robes of triumph;
Still to the lover's long-expecting arms
To-morrow brings the visionary bride.
But thou, too old to bear another cheat,
Learn, that the present hour alone is man's.
The present hour, with open arms, invites;
Seize the kind fair, and press her to thy bosom.
Who knows, ere this important morrow rise,
But fear or mutiny may taint the Greeks?
Who knows, if Mahomet's awaking anger
May spare the fatal bowstring till to-morrow?
Had our first Asian foes but known this ardour,
We still had wander'd on Tartarian hills.
Rouse, Cali; shall the sons of conquer'd Greece
Lead us to danger, and abash their victors?
This night, with all her conscious stars, be witness,
Who merits most, Demetrius or Abdalla.
Who merits most!--I knew not, we were rivals.
Young man, forbear--the heat of youth, no more--
Well,--'tis decreed--This night shall fix our fate.
Soon as the veil of ev'ning clouds the sky,
With cautious secrecy, Leontius, steer
Th' appointed vessel to yon shaded bay,
Form'd by this garden jutting on the deep;
There, with your soldiers arm'd, and sails expanded,
Await our coming, equally prepar'd
Now pause, great bassa, from the thoughts of blood,
And kindly grant an ear to gentler sounds.
If e'er thy youth has known the pangs of absence,
Or felt th' impatience of obstructed love,
Give me, before th' approaching hour of fate,
Once to behold the charms of bright Aspasia,
And draw new virtue from her heav'nly tongue.
Let prudence, ere the suit be farther urg'd,
Impartial weigh the pleasure with the danger.
A little longer, and she's thine for ever.
Prudence and love conspire in this request,
Lest, unacquainted with our bold attempt,
Surprise o'erwhelm her, and retard our flight.
What I can grant, you cannot ask in vain--
I go to wait thy call; this kind consent
And this is my reward--to burn, to languish,
To rave, unheeded; while the happy Greek,
The refuse of our swords, the dross of conquest,
Throws his fond arms about Aspasia's neck,
Dwells on her lips, and sighs upon her breast.
Is't not enough, he lives by our indulgence,
But he must live to make his masters wretched?
What claim hast thou to plead?
The claim of pow'r,
Th' unquestion'd claim of conquerors and kings!
Yet, in the use of pow'r, remember justice.
Can then th' assassin lift his treach'rous hand
Against his king, and cry, remember justice?
Justice demands the forfeit life of Cali;
Justice demands, that I reveal your crimes;
Justice demands--but see th' approaching sultan!
Oppose my wishes, and--remember justice.
Disorder sits upon thy face--retire.
Long be the sultan bless'd with happy love!
My zeal marks gladness dawning on thy cheek,
With raptures, such as fire the pagan crowds,
When, pale and anxious for their years to come,
They see the sun surmount the dark eclipse,
And hail, unanimous, their conqu'ring god.
My vows, 'tis true, she hears with less aversion;
She sighs, she blushes, but she still denies.
With warmer courtship press the yielding fair:
Call to your aid, with boundless promises,
Each rebel wish, each traitor inclination,
That raises tumults in the female breast,
The love of pow'r, of pleasure, and of show.
These arts I try'd, and, to inflame her more,
By hateful business hurried from her sight,
I bade a hundred virgins wait around her,
Sooth her with all the pleasures of command,
Applaud her charms, and court her to be great.
CALI, _solus_.
He's gone--Here rest, my soul, thy fainting wing;
Here recollect thy dissipated pow'rs.--
Our distant int'rests, and our diff'rent passions.
Now haste to mingle in one common centre.
And fate lies crowded in a narrow space.
Yet, in that narrow space what dangers rise!--
Far more I dread Abdalla's fiery folly,
Than all the wisdom of the grave divan.
Reason with reason fights on equal terms;
The raging madman's unconnected schemes
We cannot obviate, for we cannot guess.
Deep in my breast be treasur'd this resolve,
When Cali mounts the throne, Abdalla dies,
Too fierce, too faithless, for neglect or trust.
CALI, IRENE, ASPASIA, &c.
Amidst the splendour of encircling beauty,
Superiour majesty proclaims thee queen,
And nature justifies our monarch's choice.
Reserve this homage for some other fair;
Urge me not on to glitt'ring guilt, nor pour
In my weak ear th' intoxicating sounds.
Make haste, bright maid, to rule the willing world;
Aw'd by the rigour of the sultan's justice,
We court thy gentleness.
Can Cali's voice
Concur to press a hapless captive's ruin?
Long would my zeal for Mahomet and thee
Detain me here. But nations call upon me,
And duty bids me choose a distant walk,
Nor taint with care the privacies of love.
IRENE, ASPASIA, _attendants_.
If yet this shining pomp, these sudden honours,
Swell not thy soul, beyond advice or friendship,
Nor yet inspire the follies of a queen,
Or tune thine ear to soothing adulation,
Suspend awhile the privilege of pow'r,
To hear the voice of truth; dismiss thy train,
Shake off th' incumbrances of state, a moment,
And lay the tow'ring sultaness aside,
Irene _signs to her attendants to retire_.
While I foretell thy fate: that office done,--
No more I boast th' ambitious name of friend,
But sink among thy slaves, without a murmur.
Did regal diadems invest my brow,
Yet should my soul, still faithful to her choice,
Esteem Aspasia's breast the noblest kingdom.
The soul, once tainted with so foul a crime,
No more shall glow with friendship's hallow'd ardour:
Those holy beings, whose superiour care
Guides erring mortals to the paths of virtue,
Affrighted at impiety, like thine,
above speech is as follows; and, in Mr. Boswell's judgment, is
finer than in the present editions:
"Nor think to say, here will I stop;
Here will I fix the limits of transgression,
Nor farther tempt the avenging rage of heaven.
When guilt, like this, once harbours in the breast,
Those holy beings, whose unseen direction
Guides, through the maze of life, the steps of man.
Fly the detested mansions of impiety,
And quit their charge to horrour and to ruin."
See Boswell, i. for other compared extracts from the first sketch.
Upbraid me not with fancied wickedness;
I am not yet a queen, or an apostate.
But should I sin beyond the hope of mercy,
If, when religion prompts me to refuse,
The dread of instant death restrains my tongue?
Reflect, that life and death, affecting sounds!
Are only varied modes of endless being;
Reflect, that life, like ev'ry other blessing,
Derives its value from its use alone;
Not for itself, but for a nobler end,
Th' Eternal gave it, and that end is virtue.
When inconsistent with a greater good,
Reason commands to cast the less away:
Thus life, with loss of wealth, is well preserv'd,
And virtue cheaply say'd, with loss of life.
If built on settled thought, this constancy
Not idly flutters on a boastful tongue,
Why, when destruction rag'd around our walls,
Why fled this haughty heroine from the battle?
Why, then, did not this warlike amazon
Mix in the war, and shine among the heroes?
Heav'n, when its hand pour'd softness on our limbs,
Unfit for toil, and polish'd into weakness,
Made passive fortitude the praise of woman:
Our only arms are innocence and meekness.
Not then with raving cries I fill'd the city;
But, while Demetrius, dear, lamented name!
Pour'd storms of fire upon our fierce invaders,
Implor'd th' eternal pow'r to shield my country,
With silent sorrows, and with calm devotion.
O! did Irene shine the queen of Turkey,
No more should Greece lament those pray'rs rejected;
Again, should golden splendour grace her cities,
Again, her prostrate palaces should rise,
Again, her temples sound with holy musick:
No more should danger fright, or want distress
The smiling widows, and protected orphans.
Be virtuous ends pursued by virtuous means,
Nor think th' intention sanctifies the deed:
That maxim, publish'd in an impious age,
Would loose the wild enthusiast to destroy,
And fix the fierce usurper's bloody title;
Then bigotry might send her slaves to war,
And bid success become the test of truth:
Unpitying massacre might waste the world,
And persecution boast the call of heaven.
Shall I not wish to cheer afflicted kings,
And plan the happiness of mourning millions?
Dream not of pow'r, thou never canst attain:
When social laws first harmoniz'd the world,
Superiour man possess'd the charge of rule,
The scale of justice, and the sword of power,
Nor left us aught, but flattery and state.
To me my lover's fondness will restore
Whate'er man's pride has ravish'd from our sex.
When soft security shall prompt the sultan,
Freed from the tumults of unsettled conquest,
To fix his court, and regulate his pleasures,
Soon shall the dire seraglio's horrid gates
Close, like th' eternal bars of death, upon thee.
Immur'd, and buried in perpetual sloth,
That gloomy slumber of the stagnant soul,
There shalt thou view, from far, the quiet cottage,
And sigh for cheerful poverty in vain;
There wear the tedious hours of life away,
Beneath each curse of unrelenting heav'n,
Despair and slav'ry, solitude and guilt.
There shall we find the yet untasted bliss
Of grandeur and tranquillity combin'd.
Tranquillity and guilt, disjoin'd by heaven,
Still stretch in vain their longing arms afar;
Nor dare to pass th' insuperable bound.
Ah! let me rather seek the convent's cell;
There, when my thoughts, at interval of prayer,
Descend to range these mansions of misfortune,
Oft shall I dwell on our disastrous friendship,
And shed the pitying tear for lost Irene.
Go, languish on in dull obscurity;
Thy dazzled soul, with all its boasted greatness,
Shrinks at th' o'erpow'ring gleams of regal state,
Stoops from the blaze, like a degen'rate eagle,
And flies for shelter to the shades of life.
On me should providence, without a crime,
The weighty charge of royalty confer;
Call me to civilize the Russian wilds,
Or bid soft science polish Britain's heroes;
Soon should'st thou see, how false thy weak reproach,
My bosom feels, enkindled from the sky,
The lambent flames of mild benevolence,
Untouch'd by fierce ambition's raging fires.
Ambition is the stamp, impress'd by heav'n
To mark the noblest minds; with active heat
Inform'd, they mount the precipice of pow'r,
Grasp at command, and tow'r in quest of empire;
While vulgar souls compassionate their cares,
Gaze at their height, and tremble at their danger:
Thus meaner spirits, with amazement, mark
The varying seasons, and revolving skies,
And ask, what guilty pow'r's rebellious hand
Rolls with eternal toil the pond'rous orbs;
While some archangel, nearer to perfection,
In easy state, presides o'er all their motions,
Directs the planets, with a careless nod,
Conducts the sun, and regulates the spheres.
Well may'st thou hide in labyrinths of sound
The cause that shrinks from reason's pow'rful voice.
Stoop from thy flight, trace back th' entangled thought,
And set the glitt'ring fallacy to view.
Not pow'r I blame, but pow'r obtain'd by crime;
Angelick greatness is angelick virtue.
Amidst the glare of courts, the shout of armies,
Will not th' apostate feel the pangs of guilt,
And wish, too late, for innocence and peace,
Curst, as the tyrant of th' infernal realms,
With gloomy state and agonizing pomp?
A Turkish stranger, of majestick mien,
Asks at the gate admission to Aspasia,
Commission'd, as he says, by Cali bassa.
Thanks for this kind relief--With speed admit him.
He comes, perhaps, to separate us for ever;
When I am gone, remember, O! remember,
That none are great, or happy, but the virtuous.
'Tis she--my hope, my happiness, my love!
Aspasia! do I, once again, behold thee?
Still, still the same--unclouded by misfortune!
Let my blest eyes for ever gaze--
Demetrius!
Why does the blood forsake thy lovely cheek?
Why shoots this chilness through thy shaking nerves?
Why does thy soul retire into herself?
Recline upon my breast thy sinking beauties:
Revive--Revive to freedom and to love.
What well-known voice pronounc'd the grateful sounds,
Freedom and love? Alas! I'm all confusion;
A sudden mist o'ercasts my darken'd soul;
The present, past, and future swim before me,
Lost in a wild perplexity of joy.
Such ecstasy of love, such pure affection,
What worth can merit? or what faith reward?
A thousand thoughts, imperfect and distracted,
Demand a voice, and struggle into birth;
A thousand questions press upon my tongue,
But all give way to rapture and Demetrius.
O say, bright being, in this age of absence,
What fears, what griefs, what dangers, hast thou known?
Say, how the tyrant threaten'd, flatter'd, sigh'd!
Say, how he threaten'd, flatter'd, sigh'd in vain!
Say, how the hand of violence was rais'd!
Say, how thou call'dst in tears upon Demetrius!
Inform me rather, how thy happy courage
Stemm'd in the breach the deluge of destruction,
And pass'd, uninjur'd, through the walks of death.
Did savage anger and licentious conquest
Behold the hero with Aspasia's eyes?
And, thus protected in the gen'ral ruin,
O! say, what guardian pow'r convey'd thee hither.
Such strange events, such unexpected chances,
Beyond my warmest hope, or wildest wishes,
Concurr'd to give me to Aspasia's arms,
I stand amaz'd, and ask, if yet I clasp thee.
Sure heav'n, (for wonders are not wrought in vain!)
That joins us thus, will never part us more.
It parts you now--The hasty sultan sign'd
The laws unread, and flies to his Irene.
Fix'd and intent on his Irene's charms,
He envies none the converse of Aspasia.
Aspasia's absence will inflame suspicion;
She cannot, must not, shall not, linger here;
Prudence and friendship bid me force her from you.
Force her! profane her with a touch, and die!
'Tis Greece, 'tis freedom, calls Aspasia hence;
Your careless love betrays your country's cause.
If we must part--
No! let us die together.
If we must part--
Despatch; th' increasing danger
Will not admit a lover's long farewell,
The long-drawn intercourse of sighs and kisses.
Then--O! my fair, I cannot bid thee go.
Receive her, and protect her, gracious heav'n!
Yet let me watch her dear departing steps;
If fate pursues me, let it find me here.
Reproach not, Greece, a lover's fond delays,
Nor think thy cause neglected, while I gaze;
New force, new courage, from each glance I gain,
DEMETRIUS, ASPASIA, _enter as talking_.
Enough--resistless reason calms my soul--
Approving justice smiles upon your cause,
And nature's rights entreat th' asserting sword.
Yet, when your hand is lifted to destroy,
Think, but excuse a woman's needless caution,--
Purge well thy mind from ev'ry private passion,
Drive int'rest, love, and vengeance, from thy thoughts;
Fill all thy ardent breast with Greece and virtue;
Then strike secure, and heav'n assist the blow!
Thou kind assistant of my better angel,
Propitious guide of my bewilder'd soul,
Calm of my cares, and guardian of my virtue!
My soul, first kindled by thy bright example,
To noble thought and gen'rous emulation,
Now but reflects those beams that flow'd from thee.
With native lustre and unborrow'd greatness,
Thou shin'st, bright maid, superiour to distress;
Unlike the trifling race of vulgar beauties,
Those glitt'ring dewdrops of a vernal morn,
That spread their colours to the genial beam,
And, sparkling, quiver to the breath of May;
But, when the tempest, with sonorous wing,
Sweeps o'er the grove, forsake the lab'ring bough,
Dispers'd in air, or mingled with the dust.
Forbear this triumph--still new conflicts wait us,
Foes unforeseen, and dangers unsuspected.
Oft, when the fierce besiegers' eager host
Beholds the fainting garrison retire,
And rushes joyful to the naked wall,
Destruction flashes from th' insidious mine,
And sweeps th' exulting conqueror away.
Perhaps, in vain the sultan's anger spar'd me,
To find a meaner fate from treach'rous friendship--
Abdalla!--
Can Abdalla then dissemble!
That fiery chief, renown'd for gen'rous freedom,
For zeal unguarded, undissembled hate,
For daring truth, and turbulence of honour!
This open friend, this undesigning hero,
With noisy falsehoods, forc'd me from your arms,
To shock my virtue with a tale of love.
Did not the cause of Greece restrain my sword,
Aspasia should not fear a second insult.
His pride and love, by turns, inspir'd his tongue,
And intermix'd my praises with his own;
His wealth, his rank, his honours, he recounted,
Till, in the midst of arrogance and fondness,
Th' approaching sultan forc'd me from the palace;
Then, while he gaz'd upon his yielding mistress,
I stole, unheeded, from their ravish'd eyes,
And sought this happy grove in quest of thee.
Soon may the final stroke decide our fate,
Lest baleful discord crush our infant scheme,
And strangled freedom perish in the birth!
My bosom, harass'd with alternate passions,
Now hopes, now fears--
Th' anxieties of love.
Think, how the sov'reign arbiter of kingdoms
Detests thy false associates' black designs,
And frowns on perjury, revenge, and murder.
Embark'd with treason on the seas of fate,
When heaven shall bid the swelling billows rage,
And point vindictive lightnings at rebellion,
Will not the patriot share the traitor's danger?
Oh! could thy hand, unaided, free thy country,
Nor mingled guilt pollute the sacred cause!
Permitted oft, though not inspir'd, by heaven,
Successful treasons punish impious kings.
Nor end my terrours with the sultan's death;
Far as futurity's untravell'd waste
Lies open to conjecture's dubious ken,
On ev'ry side confusion, rage, and death,
Perhaps, the phantoms of a woman's fear,
Beset the treach'rous way with fatal ambush;
Each Turkish bosom burns for thy destruction,
Ambitious Cali dreads the statesman's arts,
And hot Abdalla hates the happy lover.
Capricious man! to good and ill inconstant,
Too much to fear or trust is equal weakness.
Sometimes the wretch, unaw'd by heav'n or hell,
With mad devotion idolizes honour.
The bassa, reeking with his master's murder,
Perhaps, may start at violated friendship.
How soon, alas! will int'rest, fear, or envy,
O'erthrow such weak, such accidental virtue,
Nor built on faith, nor fortified by conscience!
When desp'rate ills demand a speedy cure,
Distrust is cowardice, and prudence folly.
Yet, think a moment, ere you court destruction,
What hand, when death has snatch'd away Demetrius,
Shall guard Aspasia from triumphant lust.
Dismiss these needless fears--a troop of Greeks,
Well known, long try'd, expect us on the shore.
Borne on the surface of the smiling deep,
Soon shalt thou scorn, in safety's arms repos'd,
Abdalla's rage and Cali's stratagems.
Still, still, distrust sits heavy on my heart.
Will e'er a happier hour revisit Greece?
Should heav'n, yet unappeas'd, refuse its aid,
Disperse our hopes, and frustrate our designs,
Yet shall the conscience of the great attempt
Diffuse a brightness on our future days;
Nor will his country's groans reproach Demetrius.
But how canst thou support the woes of exile?
Canst thou forget hereditary splendours,
To live obscure upon a foreign coast,
Content with science, innocence, and love?
Nor wealth, nor titles, make Aspasia's bliss.
O'erwhelm'd and lost amidst the publick ruins,
Unmov'd, I saw the glitt'ring trifles perish,
And thought the petty dross beneath a sigh.
Cheerful I follow to the rural cell;
Love be my wealth, and my distinction virtue.
Submissive, and prepar'd for each event,
Now let us wait the last award of heav'n,
Secure of happiness from flight or conquest;
Nor fear the fair and learn'd can want protection.
The mighty Tuscan courts the banish'd arts
To kind Italia's hospitable shades;
There shall soft leisure wing th' excursive soul,
And peace, propitious, smile on fond desire;
There shall despotick eloquence resume
Her ancient empire o'er the yielding heart;
There poetry shall tune her sacred voice,
And wake from ignorance the western world.
At length th' unwilling sun resigns the world
To silence and to rest. The hours of darkness,
Propitious hours to stratagem and death,
Pursue the last remains of ling'ring light.
Count not these hours, as parts of vulgar time;
Think them a sacred treasure lent by heaven,
Which, squander'd by neglect, or fear, or folly,
No prayer recalls, no diligence redeems.
To-morrow's dawn shall see the Turkish king
Stretch'd in the dust, or tow'ring on his throne;
To-morrow's dawn shall see the mighty Cali
The sport of tyranny, or lord of nations.
Then waste no longer these important moments
In soft endearments, and in gentle murmurs;
Nor lose, in love, the patriot and the hero.
'Tis love, combin'd with guilt alone, that melts
The soften'd soul to cowardice and sloth;
But virtuous passion prompts the great resolve,
And fans the slumbering spark of heavenly fire.
Retire, my fair; that pow'r that smiles on goodness,
Guide all thy steps, calm ev'ry stormy thought,
And still thy bosom with the voice of peace!
Soon may we meet again, secure and free,
This night alone is ours--Our mighty foe,
No longer lost in am'rous solitude,
Will now remount the slighted seat of empire,
And show Irene to the shouting people:
Aspasia left her, sighing in his arms,
And list'ning to the pleasing tale of pow'r;
With soften'd voice she dropp'd the faint refusal,
Smiling consent she sat, and blushing love.
Now, tyrant, with satiety of beauty
Now feast thine eyes; thine eyes, that ne'er hereafter
Shall dart their am'rous glances at the fair,
Or glare on Cali with malignant beams.
Our bark, unseen, has reach'd th' appointed bay,
And, where yon trees wave o'er the foaming surge,
Reclines against the shore: our Grecian troop
Extends its lines along the sandy beach,
Elate with hope, and panting for a foe.
The fav'ring winds assist the great design,
Sport in our sails, and murmur o'er the deep.
'Tis well--A single blow completes our wishes;
Return with speed, Leontius, to your charge;
The Greeks, disorder'd by their leader's absence,
May droop dismay'd, or kindle into madness.
Suspected still!--What villain's pois'nous tongue
Dares join Leontius' name with fear or falsehood?
Have I for this preserv'd my guiltless bosom,
Pure as the thoughts of infant innocence?
Have I for this defy'd the chiefs of Turkey,
Intrepid in the flaming front of war?
Hast thou not search'd my soul's profoundest thoughts?
Is not the fate of Greece and Cali thine?
Why has thy choice then pointed out Leontius,
Unfit to share this night's illustrious toils?
To wait, remote from action, and from honour,
An idle list'ner to the distant cries
Of slaughter'd infidels, and clash of swords?
Tell me the cause, that while thy name, Demetrius,
Shall soar, triumphant on the wings of glory,
Despis'd and curs'd, Leontius must descend
Through hissing ages, a proverbial coward,
The tale of women, and the scorn of fools?
Can brave Leontius be the slave of glory?
Glory, the casual gift of thoughtless crowds!
Glory, the bribe of avaricious virtue!
Be but my country free, be thine the praise;
I ask no witness, but attesting conscience,
No records, but the records of the sky.
Wilt thou then head the troop upon the shore,
While I destroy th' oppressor of mankind?
What canst thou boast superiour to Demetrius?
Ask, to whose sword the Greeks will trust their cause,
My name shall echo through the shouting field:
Demand, whose force yon Turkish heroes dread,
The shudd'ring camp shall murmur out Demetrius.
Must Greece, still wretched by her children's folly,
For ever mourn their avarice or factions?
Demetrius justly pleads a double title;
The lover's int'rest aids the patriot's claim.
My pride shall ne'er protract my country's woes;
Succeed, my friend, unenvied by Leontius.
I feel new spirit shoot along my nerves;
My soul expands to meet approaching freedom.
Now hover o'er us, with propitious wings,
Ye sacred shades of patriots and of martyrs!
All ye, whose blood tyrannick rage effus'd,
Or persecution drank, attend our call;
I And from the mansions of perpetual peace
Descend, to sweeten labours, once your own!
Go then, and with united eloquence
Confirm your troops; and, when the moon's fair beam
Plays on the quiv'ring waves, to guide our flight,
Return, Demetrius, and be free for ever.
How the new monarch, swell'd with airy rule,
Looks down, contemptuous, from his fancy'd height,
And utters fate, unmindful of Abdalla!
Far be such black ingratitude from Cali!
When Asia's nations own me for their lord,
Wealth, and command, and grandeur shall be thine!
Is this the recompense reserv'd for me?
Dar'st thou thus dally with Abdalla's passion?
Henceforward, hope no more my slighted friendship;
Wake from thy dream of power to death and tortures,
And bid thy visionary throne farewell.
Name, and enjoy thy wish--
I need not name it;
Aspasia's lovers know but one desire,
Nor hope, nor wish, nor live, but for Aspasia.
That fatal beauty, plighted to Demetrius,
Heaven makes not mine to give.
Nor to deny.
Obtain her, and possess; thou know'st thy rival.
Too well I know him, since, on Thracia's plains,
I felt the force of his tempestuous arm,
And saw my scatter'd squadrons fly before him.
Nor will I trust th' uncertain chance of combat;
The rights of princes let the sword decide,
The petty claims of empire and of honour:
Revenge and subtle jealousy shall teach
A surer passage to his hated heart.
Oh! spare the gallant Greek, in him we lose
The politician's arts, and hero's flame.
When next we meet, before we storm the palace,
The bowl shall circle to confirm our league;
Then shall these juices taint Demetrius' draught,
And stream, destructive, through his freezing veins:
Thus shall he live to strike th' important blow,
And perish, ere he taste the joys of conquest.
Henceforth, for ever happy be this day,
Sacred to love, to pleasure, and Irene!
The matchless fair has bless'd me with compliance;
Let every tongue resound Irene's praise,
And spread the gen'ral transport through mankind.
Blest prince, for whom indulgent heav'n ordains,
At once, the joys of paradise and empire,
Now join thy people's and thy Cali's prayers;
Suspend thy passage to the seats of bliss,
Nor wish for houries in Irene's arms.
Forbear--I know the long-try'd faith of Cali.
Oh! could the eyes of kings, like those of heav'n,
Search to the dark recesses of the soul,
Oft would they find ingratitude and treason,
By smiles, and oaths, and praises, ill disguis'd.
How rarely would they meet, in crowded courts,
Fidelity so firm, so pure, as mine.
Yet, ere we give our loosen'd thoughts to rapture,
Let prudence obviate an impending danger:
Tainted by sloth, the parent of sedition,
The hungry janizary burns for plunder,
And growls, in private, o'er his idle sabre.
To still their murmurs, ere the twentieth sun
Shall shed his beams upon the bridal bed,
I rouse to war, and conquer for Irene.
Then shall the Rhodian mourn his sinking tow'rs,
And Buda fall, and proud Vienna tremble;
Then shall Venetia feel the Turkish pow'r,
And subject seas roar round their queen in vain.
Then seize fair Italy's delightful coast,
To fix your standard in imperial Rome.
Her sons malicious clemency shall spare,
To form new legends, sanctify new crimes;
To canonize the slaves of superstition,
And fill the world with follies and impostures,
Till angry heav'n shall mark them out for ruin,
And war o'erwhelm them in their dream of vice.
O! could her fabled saints and boasted prayers
Call forth her ancient heroes to the field,
How should I joy, midst the fierce shock of nations,
To cross the tow'rings of an equal soul,
And bid the master-genius rule the world!
Abdalla, Cali, go--proclaim my purpose.
Still Cali lives: and must he live to-morrow?
That fawning villain's forc'd congratulations
Will cloud my triumphs, and pollute the day.
With cautious vigilance, at my command,
Two faithful captains, Hasan and Caraza,
Pursue him through his labyrinths of treason,
And wait your summons to report his conduct.
Call them--but let them not prolong their tale,
Nor press, too much, upon a lover's patience.
Mahomet, _Solus_.
Whome'er the hope, still blasted, still renew'd,
Of happiness lures on from toil to toil,
Remember Mahomet, and cease thy labour.
Behold him here, in love, in war, successful;
Behold him, wretched in his double triumph!
His fav'rite faithless, and his mistress base.
Ambition only gave her to my arms,
By reason not convinc'd, nor won by love.
Ambition was her crime; but meaner folly
Dooms me to loathe, at once, and dote on falsehood,
And idolize th' apostate I contemn.
If thou art more than the gay dream of fancy,
More than a pleasing sound, without a meaning,
O happiness! sure thou art all Aspasia's.
Caraza, speak--have ye remark'd the bassa?
Close, as we might unseen, we watch'd his steps:
His hair disorder'd, and his gait unequal,
Betray'd the wild emotions of his mind.
Sudden he stops, and inward turns his eyes,
Absorb'd in thought; then, starting from his trance,
Constrains a sullen smile, and shoots away.
With him Abdalla we beheld--
Abdalla!
He wears, of late, resentment on his brow,
Deny'd the government of Servia's province.
We mark'd him storming in excess of fury,
And heard, within the thicket that conceal'd us,
An undistinguish'd sound of threat'ning rage.
How guilt, once harbour'd in the conscious breast,
Intimidates the brave, degrades the great;
See Cali, dread of kings, and pride of armies,
By treason levell'd with the dregs of men!
Ere guilty fear depress'd the hoary chief,
An angry murmur, a rebellious frown,
Had stretch'd the fiery boaster in the grave.
Shall monarchs fear to draw the sword of justice,
Aw'd by the crowd, and by their slaves restrain'd?
Seize him this night, and, through the private passage,
Convey him to the prison's inmost depths,
Reserv'd to all the pangs of tedious death.
Shall then the Greeks, unpunish'd and conceal'd,
Contrive, perhaps, the ruin of our empire;
League with our chiefs, and propagate sedition?
Whate'er their scheme, the bassa's death defeats it,
And gratitude's strong ties restrain my tongue.
What ties to slaves? what gratitude to foes?
In that black day, when slaughter'd thousands fell
Around these fatal walls, the tide of war
Bore me victorious onward, where Demetrius
Tore, unresisted, from the giant hand
Of stern Sebalias, the triumphant crescent,
And dash'd the might of Asam from the ramparts.
There I became, nor blush to make it known,
The captive of his sword. The coward Greeks,
Enrag'd by wrongs, exulting with success,
Doom'd me to die with all the Turkish captains;
But brave Demetrius scorn'd the mean revenge,
And gave me life.--
Do thou repay the gift,
Lest unrewarded mercy lose its charms.
Profuse of wealth, or bounteous of success,
When heav'n bestows the privilege to bless,
Let no weak doubt the gen'rous hand restrain;
ASPASIA, _sola_.
In these dark moments of suspended fate,
While yet the future fortune of my country
Lies in the womb of providence conceal'd,
And anxious angels wait the mighty birth;
O! grant thy sacred influence, pow'rful virtue!
Attentive rise, survey the fair creation,
Till, conscious of th' encircling deity,
Beyond the mists of care thy pinion tow'rs.
This calm, these joys, dear innocence! are thine:
Joys ill exchang'd for gold, and pride, and empire.
ASPASIA, IRENE _and attendants_.
See how the moon, through all th' unclouded sky,
Spreads her mild radiance, and descending dews
Revive the languid flow'rs; thus nature shone
New from the maker's hand, and fair array'd
In the bright colours of primeval spring;
When purity, while fraud was yet unknown,
Play'd fearless in th' inviolated shades.
This elemental joy, this gen'ral calm,
Is, sure, the smile of unoffended heav'n.
Yet! why--
Behold, within th' embow'ring grove
Aspasia stands--
With melancholy mien,
Pensive, and envious of Irene's greatness.
Steal, unperceiv'd, upon her meditations
But see, the lofty maid, at our approach,
Resumes th' imperious air of haughty virtue.
Are these th' unceasing joys, th' unmingled pleasures,
For which Aspasia scorn'd the Turkish crown?
Is this th' unshaken confidence in heav'n?
Is this the boasted bliss of conscious virtue?
When did content sigh out her cares in secret?
When did felicity repine in deserts?
Ill suits with guilt the gaieties of triumph;
When daring vice insults eternal justice,
The ministers of wrath forget compassion,
And snatch the flaming bolt with hasty hand.
Forbear thy threats, proud prophetess of ill,
Vers'd in the secret counsels of the sky.
Forbear!--But thou art sunk beneath reproach;
In vain affected raptures flush the cheek,
And songs of pleasure warble from the tongue,
When fear and anguish labour in the breast,
And all within is darkness and confusion.
Thus, on deceitful Etna's flow'ry side,
Unfading verdure glads the roving eye;
While secret flames, with unextinguish'd rage,
Insatiate on her wasted entrails prey,
And melt her treach'rous beauties into ruin.
Fly, fly, my love! destruction rushes on us,
The rack expects us, and the sword pursues.
Is Greece deliver'd? is the tyrant fall'n?
Greece is no more; the prosp'rous tyrant lives,
Reserv'd for other lands, the scourge of heav'n.
Say, by what fraud, what force, were you defeated?
Betray'd by falsehood, or by crowds o'erborne?
The pressing exigence forbids relation.
Abdalla--
Hated name! his jealous rage
Broke out in perfidy--Oh! curs'd Aspasia,
Born to complete the ruin of her country!
Hide me, oh hide me from upbraiding Greece;
Oh, hide me from myself!
Be fruitless grief
The doom of guilt alone, nor dare to seize
The breast, where virtue guards the throne of peace.
Devolve, dear maid, thy sorrows on the wretch,
Whose fear, or rage, or treachery, betray'd us!
IRENE. _aside_.
A private station may discover more;
Then let me rid them of Irene's presence;
Proceed, and give a loose to love and treason.
Yet tell.
To tell or hear were waste of life.
The life, which only this design supported,
Were now well lost in hearing how you fail'd.
Or meanly fraudulent or madly gay,
Abdalla, while we waited near the palace,
With ill tim'd mirth propos'd the bowl of love.
Just as it reach'd my lips, a sudden cry
Urg'd me to dash it to the ground, untouch'd,
And seize my sword with disencumber'd hand.
What cry? The stratagem? Did then Abdalla--
At once a thousand passions fir'd his cheek!
Then all is past, he cry'd--and darted from us;
Nor, at the call of Cali, deign'd to turn.
Why did you stay, deserted and betray'd?
What more could force attempt, or art contrive?
Amazement seiz'd us, and the hoary bassa
Stood, torpid in suspense; but soon Abdalla
Return'd with force that made resistance vain,
And bade his new confed'rates seize the traitors.
Cali, disarm'd, was borne away to death;
Myself escap'd, or favour'd, or neglected.
Oh Greece! renown'd for science and for wealth,
Behold thy boasted honours snatch'd away.
Though disappointment blast our general scheme,
Yet much remains to hope. I shall not call
The day disastrous, that secures our flight;
Nor think that effort lost, which rescues thee.
At length, the prize is mine--The haughty maid,
That bears the fate of empires in her air,
Henceforth shall live for me; for me alone
Shall plume her charms, and, with attentive watch,
Steal from Abdalla's eye the sign to smile.
Cease this wild roar of savage exultation;
Advance, and perish in the frantick boast.
Forbear, Demetrius, 'tis Aspasia calls thee;
Thy love, Aspasia, calls; restrain thy sword;
Nor rush on useless wounds, with idle courage.
What now remains?
It now remains to fly!
Shall, then, the savage live, to boast his insult;
Tell, how Demetrius shunn'd his single hand,
And stole his life and mistress from his sabre?
Infatuate loiterer, has fate, in vain,
Unclasp'd his iron gripe to set thee free?
Still dost thou flutter in the jaws of death;
Snar'd with thy fears, and maz'd in stupefaction?
Forgive, my fair; 'tis life, 'tis nature calls:
Now, traitor, feel the fear that chills my hand.
'Tis madness to provoke superfluous danger,
And cowardice to dread the boast of folly.
Fly, wretch, while yet my pity grants thee flight;
The pow'r of Turkey waits upon my call.
Leave but this maid, resign a hopeless claim,
And drag away thy life, in scorn and safety,
Thy life, too mean a prey to lure Abdalla.
Once more I dare thy sword; behold the prize,
Behold, I quit her to the chance of battle.
Well may'st thou call thy master to the combat,
And try the hazard, that hast nought to stake;
Alike my death or thine is gain to thee;
But soon thou shalt repent: another moment
Shall throw th' attending janizaries round thee.
Haste, Murza, to the palace, let the sultan
Despatch his guards to stop the flying traitors,
While I protract their stay. Be swift and faithful.
Secure his confidence, and fix his love.
Behold a boaster's worth! Now snatch, my fair,
The happy moment; hasten to the shore,
Ere he return with thousands at his side.
In vain I listen to th' inviting call
Of freedom and of love; my trembling joints,
Relax'd with fear, refuse to bear me forward.
Depart, Demetrius, lest my fate involve thee;
Forsake a wretch abandon'd to despair,
To share the miseries herself has caus'd.
Let us not struggle with th' eternal will,
Nor languish o'er irreparable ruins;
Come, haste and live--Thy innocence and truth
Shall bless our wand'rings, and propitiate heav'n.
Press not her flight, while yet her feeble nerves
Refuse their office, and uncertain life
Still labours with imaginary woe;
Here let me tend her with officious care,
Watch each unquiet flutter of the breast,
And joy to feel the vital warmth return,
To see the cloud forsake her kindling cheek,
And hail the rosy dawn of rising health.
Oh! rather, scornful of flagitious greatness,
Resolve to share our dangers and our toils,
Companion of our flight, illustrious exile,
Leave slav'ry, guilt, and infamy behind.
My soul attends thy voice, and banish'd virtue
Strives to regain her empire of the mind:
Assist her efforts with thy strong persuasion;
Sure, 'tis the happy hour ordain'd above,
When vanquish'd vice shall tyrannise no more.
Remember, peace and anguish are before thee,
And honour and reproach, and heav'n and hell.
Content with freedom, and precarious greatness.
Now make thy choice, while yet the pow'r of choice
Kind heav'n affords thee, and inviting mercy
Holds out her hand to lead thee back to truth.
Stay--in this dubious twilight of conviction,
The gleams of reason, and the clouds of passion,
Irradiate and obscure my breast, by turns:
Stay but a moment, and prevailing truth
Will spread resistless light upon my soul.
But, since none knows the danger of a moment,
And heav'n forbids to lavish life away,
Let kind compulsion terminate the contest.
Ye christian captives, follow me to freedom:
A galley waits us, and the winds invite.
Whence is this violence?
Your calmer thought
Will teach a gentler term.
Forbear this rudeness,
And learn the rev'rence due to Turkey's queen:
Fly, slaves, and call the sultan to my rescue.
Farewell, unhappy maid; may every joy
Be thine, that wealth can give, or guilt receive!
nd when, contemptuous of imperial pow'r,
Disease shall chase the phantoms of ambition,
May penitence attend thy mournful bed,
And wing thy latest pray'r to pitying heav'n!
_After a pause_.
Against the head, which innocence secures,
Insidious malice aims her darts in vain,
Turn'd backwards by the pow'rful breath of heav'n.
Perhaps, e'en now the lovers, unpursu'd,
Bound o'er the sparkling waves. Go, happy bark,
Thy sacred freight shall still the raging main.
To guide thy passage shall th' aerial spirits
Fill all the starry lamps with double blaze;
Th' applauding sky shall pour forth all its beams,
To grace the triumph of victorious virtue;
While I, not yet familiar to my crimes,
Recoil from thought, and shudder at myself.
How am I chang'd! How lately did Irene
Fly from the busy pleasures of her sex,
Well pleas'd to search the treasures of remembrance,
And live her guiltless moments o'er anew!
Come, let us seek new pleasures in the palace,
Till soft fatigue invite us to repose.
Fair falsehood, stay.
What dream of sudden power
Has taught my slave the language of command?
Henceforth, be wise, nor hope a second pardon.
Who calls for pardon from a wretch condemn'd?
Thy look, thy speech, thy action, all is wildness--
Who charges guilt, on me?
Who charges guilt!
Ask of thy heart; attend the voice of conscience--
Who charges guilt! lay by this proud resentment
That fires thy cheek, and elevates thy mien,
Nor thus usurp the dignity of virtue.
Review this day.
Whate'er thy accusation,
The sultan is my judge.
That hope is past;
Hard was the strife of justice and of love;
But now 'tis o'er, and justice has prevail'd.
Know'st thou not Cali? know'st thou not Demetrius?
Bold slave, I know them both--I know them traitors.
Perfidious!--yes--too well thou know'st them traitors.
Their treason throws no stain upon Irene.
This day has prov'd my fondness for the sultan;
He knew Irene's truth.
The sultan knows it;
He knows, how near apostasy to treason--
But 'tis not mine to judge--I scorn and leave thee.
I go, lest vengeance urge my hand to blood,
To blood too mean to stain a soldier's sabre.
IRENE, _to her attendants_.
Go, blust'ring slave--He has not heard of Murza.
That dext'rous message frees me from suspicion.
_Enter_ HASAN, CARAZA, _with mutes, who throw the black
robe upon_ IRENE, _and sign to her attendants to withdraw_.
Forgive, fair excellence, th' unwilling tongue,
The tongue, that, forc'd by strong necessity,
Bids beauty, such as thine, prepare to die.
What wild mistake is this! Take hence, with speed,
Your robe of mourning, and your dogs of death.
Quick from my sight, you inauspicious monsters;
Nor dare, henceforth, to shock Irene's walks.
Alas! they come commanded by the sultan,
Th' unpitying ministers of Turkish justice,
Nor dare to spare the life his frown condemns.
Are these the rapid thunderbolts of war,
That pour with sudden violence on kingdoms,
And spread their flames, resistless, o'er the world?
What sleepy charms benumb these active heroes,
Depress their spirits, and retard their speed?
Beyond the fear of ling'ring punishment,
Aspasia now, within her lover's arms,
Securely sleeps, and, in delightful dreams,
Smiles at the threat'nings of defeated rage.
We come, bright virgin, though relenting nature
Shrinks at the hated task, for thy destruction.
When summon'd by the sultan's clam'rous fury,
We ask'd, with tim'rous tongue, th' offender's name,
He struck his tortur'd breast, and roar'd, Irene!
We started at the sound, again inquir'd;
Again his thund'ring voice return'd, Irene!
Whence is this rage; what barb'rous tongue has wrong'd me?
What fraud misleads him? or what crimes incense?
Expiring Cali nam'd Irene's chamber,
The place appointed for his master's death.
Irene's chamber! From my faithful bosom
Far be the thought--But hear my protestation.
'Tis ours, alas! to punish, not to judge,
Not call'd to try the cause, we heard the sentence,
Ordain'd the mournful messengers of death.
Some ill designing statesman's base intrigue!
Some cruel stratagem of jealous beauty!
Perhaps, yourselves the villains that defame me:--
Now haste to murder, ere returning thought
Recall th' extorted doom.--It must be so:
Confess your crime, or lead me to the sultan;
There dauntless truth shall blast the vile accuser;
Then shall you feel, what language cannot utter,
Each piercing torture, ev'ry change of pain,
That vengeance can invent, or pow'r inflict.
ABDALLA, _aside_.
All is not lost, Abdalla; see the queen,
See the last witness of thy guilt and fear,
Enrob'd in death--Despatch her, and be great.
Unhappy fair! compassion calls upon me
To check this torrent of imperious rage:
While unavailing anger crowds thy tongue
With idle threats and fruitless exclamation,
The fraudful moments ply their silent wings,
And steal thy life away. Death's horrid angel
Already shakes his bloody sabre o'er thee.
The raging sultan burns, till our return,
Curses the dull delays of ling'ring mercy,
And thinks his fatal mandates ill obey'd.
Is then your sov'reign's life so cheaply rated,
That thus you parley with detected treason?
Should she prevail to gain the sultan's presence,
Soon might her tears engage a lover's credit;
Perhaps, her malice might transfer the charge;
Perhaps, her pois'nous tongue might blast Abdalla.
O! let me but be heard, nor fear from me
Or flights of pow'r, or projects of ambition.
My hopes, my wishes, terminate in life,
A little life, for grief, and for repentance.
I mark'd her wily messenger afar,
And saw him sculking in the closest walks:
I guess'd her dark designs, and warn'd the sultan,
And bring her former sentence new-confirmed.
Then call it not our cruelty, nor crime;
Deem us not deaf to woe, nor blind to beauty,
That, thus constrain'd, we speed the stroke of death.
O, name not death! Distraction and amazement,
Horrour and agony are in that sound!
Let me but live, heap woes on woes upon me;
Hide me with murd'rers in the dungeon's gloom;
Send me to wander on some pathless shore,
Let shame and hooting infamy pursue me,
Let slav'ry harass, and let hunger gripe.
Could we reverse the sentence of the sultan,
Our bleeding bosoms plead Irene's cause.
But cries and tears are vain; prepare, with patience,
To meet that fate, we can delay no longer.
Despatch, ye ling'ring slaves; or nimbler hands,
Quick at my call, shall execute your charge;
Despatch, and learn a fitter time for pity.
Grant me one hour. O! grant me but a moment,
And bounteous heav'n repay the mighty mercy,
With peaceful death, and happiness eternal.
The pray'r I cannot grant--I dare not hear.
Unutterable anguish!
Guilt and despair, pale spectres! grin around me,
And stun me with the yellings of damnation!
O, hear my pray'rs! accept, all-pitying heav'n,
These tears, these pangs, these last remains of life;
Nor let the crimes of this detested day
Be charg'd upon my soul. O, mercy! mercy!
ABDALLA, _aside_.
Safe in her death, and in Demetrius' flight,
Abdalla, bid thy troubled breast be calm.
Now shalt thou shine, the darling of the sultan,
The plot all Cali's, the detection thine.
HASAN _to_ CARAZA.
Does not thy bosom (for I know thee tender,
A stranger to th' oppressor's savage joy,)
Melt at Irene's fate, and share her woes?
Her piercing cries yet fill the loaded air,
Dwell on my ear, and sadden all my soul.
But let us try to clear our clouded brows,
And tell the horrid tale with cheerful face;
The stormy sultan rages at our stay.
Frame your report with circumspective art:
Inflame her crimes, exalt your own obedience;
But let no thoughtless hint involve Abdalla.
What need of caution to report the fate
Of her, the sultan's voice condemn'd to die?
Or why should he, whose violence of duty
Has serv'd his prince so well, demand our silence?
Perhaps, my zeal, too fierce, betray'd my prudence;
Perhaps, my warmth exceeded my commission;
Perhaps--I will not stoop to plead my cause,
Or argue with the slave that sav'd Demetrius.
From his escape learn thou the pow'r of virtue;
Nor hope his fortune, while thou want'st his worth.
The sultan comes, still gloomy, still enraged.
Where's this fair traitress? Where's this smiling mischief,
Whom neither vows could fix, nor favours bind?
Thine orders, mighty sultan, are perform'd,
And all Irene now is breathless clay.
Your hasty zeal defrauds the claim of justice,
And disappointed vengeance burns in vain.
I came to heighten tortures by reproach,
And add new terrours to the face of death.
Was this the maid, whose love I bought with empire?
True, she was fair; the smile of innocence
Play'd on her cheek--So shone the first apostate--
Irene's chamber! Did not roaring Cali,
Just as the rack forc'd out his struggling soul,
Name for the scene of death, Irene's chamber?
His breath prolong'd, but to detect her treason,
Then, in short sighs, forsook his broken frame.
Decreed to perish in Irene's chamber!
There had she lull'd me with endearing falsehoods,
Clasp'd in her arms, or slumb'ring on her breast,
And bar'd my bosom to the ruffian's dagger.
Forgive, great sultan, that, by fate prevented,
I bring a tardy message from Irene.
Some artful wile of counterfeited love!
Some soft decoy to lure me to destruction!
And thou, the curs'd accomplice of her treason,
Declare thy message, and expect thy doom.
The queen requested, that a chosen troop
Might intercept the traitor Greek, Demetrius,
Then ling'ring with his captive mistress here.
The Greek, Demetrius! whom th' expiring bassa
Declar'd the chief associate of his guilt!
A chosen troop--to intercept--Demetrius--
The queen requested--Wretch, repeat the message;
And, if one varied accent prove thy falsehood,
Or but one moment's pause betray confusion,
Those trembling limbs--Speak out, thou shiv'ring traitor.
The queen requested--
MAHOMET.                     Who? the dead Irene?
Was she then guiltless! Has my thoughtless rage
Destroy'd the fairest workmanship of heav'n!
Doom'd her to death, unpity'd and unheard,
Amidst her kind solicitudes for me!
Ye slaves of cruelty, ye tools of rage,
Ye blind, officious ministers of folly,
Could not her charms repress your zeal for murder?
Could not her pray'rs, her innocence, her tears,
Suspend the dreadful sentence for an hour?
One hour had freed me from the fatal errour!
One hour had say'd me from despair and madness.
Your fierce impatience forc'd us from your presence,
Urg'd us to speed, and bade us banish pity,
Nor trust our passions with her fatal charms.
What hadst thou lost, by slighting those commands?
Thy life, perhaps--Were but Irene spar'd,
Well, if a thousand lives like thine had perish'd;
Such beauty, sweetness, love, were cheaply bought
With half the grov'ling slaves that load the globe.
Great is thy woe! But think, illustrious sultan,
Such ills are sent for souls, like thine, to conquer.
Shake off this weight of unavailing grief,
Rush to the war, display thy dreadful banners,
And lead thy troops, victorious, round the world.
Robb'd of the maid, with whom I wish'd to triumph,
No more I burn for fame, or for dominion;
Success and conquest now are empty sounds,
Remorse and anguish seize on all my breast;
Those groves, whose shades embower'd the dear Irene,
Heard her last cries, and fann'd her dying beauties,
Shall hide me from the tasteless world for ever.
Yet, ere I quit the sceptre of dominion,
Let one just act conclude the hateful day--
Hew down, ye guards, those vassals of destruction,
Those hounds of blood, that catch the hint to kill,
Bear off, with eager haste, th' unfinished sentence,
And speed the stroke, lest mercy should o'ertake them.
Then hear, great Mahomet, the voice of truth.
Hear! shall I hear thee! didst thou hear Irene?
Hear but a moment.
Hadst thou heard a moment,
Thou might'st have liv'd, for thou hadst spar'd Irene.
I heard her, pitied her, and wish'd to save her.
And wish'd--be still thy fate to wish in vain.
I heard, and soften'd, till Abdalla brought
Her final doom, and hurried her destruction.
Abdalla brought her doom! Abdalla brought it!
The wretch, whose guilt, declar'd by tortur'd Cali,
My rage and grief had hid from my remembrance:
Abdalla brought her doom!
Abdalla brought it,
While yet she begg'd to plead her cause before thee.
O, seize me, madness--Did she call on me!
I feel, I see the ruffian's barb'rous rage.
He seiz'd her melting in the fond appeal,
And stopp'd the heav'nly voice that call'd on me.
My spirits fail; awhile support me, vengeance--
Be just, ye slaves; and, to be just, be cruel;
Contrive new racks, imbitter ev'ry pang,
Inflict whatever treason can deserve,
Which murder'd innocence that call'd on me.
MUSTAPHA _to_ MURZA.
What plagues, what tortures, are in store for thee,
Thou sluggish idler, dilatory slave!
Behold the model of consummate beauty,
Torn from the mourning earth by thy neglect.
Such was the will of heav'n--A band of Greeks,
That mark'd my course, suspicious of my purpose,
Rush'd out and seiz'd me, thoughtless and unarm'd,
Breathless, amaz'd, and on the guarded beach
Detain'd me, till Demetrius set me free.
So sure the fall of greatness, rais'd on crimes!
So fix'd the justice of all conscious heav'n!
When haughty guilt exults with impious joy,
Mistake shall blast, or accident destroy;
Weak man, with erring rage, may throw the dart,
But heav'n shall guide it to the guilty heart.
Marry a Turk! a haughty, tyrant king!
Who thinks us women born to dress and sing
To please his fancy! see no other man!
Let him persuade me to it--if he can;
Besides, he has fifty wives; and who can bear
To have the fiftieth part, her paltry share?
'Tis true, the fellow's handsome, straight, and tall,
But how the devil should he please us all!
My swain is little--true--but, be it known,
My pride's to have that little all my own.
Men will be ever to their errours blind,
Where woman's not allow'd to speak her mind.
I swear this eastern pageantry is nonsense,
And for one man--one wife's enough in conscience.
In vain proud man usurps what's woman's due;
For us, alone, they honour's paths pursue:
Inspir'd by us, they glory's heights ascend;
Woman the source, the object, and the end.
Though wealth, and pow'r, and glory, they receive,
These are all trifles to what we can give.
For us the statesman labours, hero fights,
Bears toilsome days, and wakes long tedious nights;
And, when blest peace has silenc'd war's alarms;
Receives his full reward in beauty's arms.
Acted at Drury lane theatre, for the benefit of Milton's
Ye patriot crowds, who burn for England's fame,
Ye nymphs, whose bosoms beat at Milton's name;
Whose gen'rous zeal, unbought by flatt'ring rhymes,
Shames the mean pensions of Augustan times;
Immortal patrons of succeeding days,
Attend this prelude of perpetual praise;
Let wit, condemn'd the feeble war to wage
With close malevolence, or publick rage;
Let study, worn with virtue's fruitless lore,
Behold this theatre, and grieve no more.
This night, distinguish'd by your smiles, shall tell,
That never Britain can in vain excel;
The slighted arts futurity shall trust,
And rising ages hasten to be just.
At length, our mighty bard's victorious lays
Fill the loud voice of universal praise;
And baffled spite, with hopeless anguish dumb,
Yields to renown the centuries to come;
With ardent haste each candidate of fame,
Ambitious, catches at his tow'ring name;
He sees, and pitying sees, vain wealth bestow
Those pageant honours, which he scorn'd below;
While crowds aloft the laureate bust behold,
Or trace his form on circulating gold.
Unknown, unheeded, long his offspring lay,
And want hung threat'ning o'er her slow decay,
What, though she shine with no Miltonian fire,
No fav'ring muse her morning dreams inspire;
Yet softer claims the melting heart engage,
Her youth laborious, and her blameless age;
Her's the mild merits of domestick life,
The patient sufferer, and the faithful wife.
Thus, grac'd with humble virtue's native charms,
Her grandsire leaves her in Britannia's arms;
Secure with peace, with competence, to dwell,
While tutelary nations guard her cell.
Yours is the charge, ye fair, ye wise, ye brave!
'Tis yours to crown desert--beyond the grave.
Prest by the load of life, the weary mind
Surveys the gen'ral toil of human kind;
With cool submission joins the lab'ring train,
And social sorrow loses half its pain:
Our anxious bard, without complaint, may share
This bustling season's epidemick care;
Like Caesar's pilot, dignify'd by fate,
Tost in one common storm with all the great;
Distrest alike the statesman and the wit,
When one a borough courts, and one the pit.
The busy candidates for pow'r and fame
Have hopes, and fears, and wishes, just the same;
Disabled both to combat or to fly,
Must hear all taunts, and hear without reply.
Uncheck'd on both loud rabbles vent their rage,
As mongrels bay the lion in a cage.
Th' offended burgess hoards his angry tale,
For that blest year, when all that vote may rail;
Their schemes of spite the poet's foes dismiss,
Till that glad night, when all that hate may hiss.
"This day the powder'd curls and golden coat,"
Says swelling Crispin, "begg'd a cobbler's vote."
"This night our wit," the pert apprentice cries,
"Lies at my feet; I hiss him, and he dies."
The great, 'tis true, can charm th' electing tribe;
The bard may supplicate, but cannot bribe.
Yet, judg'd by those whose voices ne'er were sold,
He feels no want of ill persuading gold;
But, confident of praise, if praise be due,
Trusts, without fear, to merit and to you.
This night presents a play, which publick rage,
From zeal or malice, now, no more we dread,
For English vengeance wars not with the dead.
A gen'rous foe regards, with pitying eye,
The man whom fate has laid, where all must lie.
To wit, reviving from its author's dust,
Be kind, ye judges, or at least be just.
For no renew'd hostilities invade
Th' oblivious grave's inviolable shade.
Let one great payment ev'ry claim appease;
And him, who cannot hurt, allow to please;
To please by scenes, unconscious of offence,
By harmless merriment, or useful sense.
Where aught of bright, or fair, the piece displays,
Approve it only--'tis too late to praise.
If want of skill, or want of care appear,
Forbear to hiss--the poet cannot hear.
By all, like him, must praise and blame be found,
At best a fleeting gleam, or empty sound.
Yet, then, shall calm reflection bless the night,
When lib'ral pity dignify'd delight;
When pleasure fir'd her torch at virtue's flame,
And mirth was bounty with an humbler name.
Kelly, widow of Hugh Kelly, esq. (the author of the play,) and her
children.
to damn it, and succeeded.
Stern winter now, by spring repress'd,
Forbears the long-continued strife;
And nature, on her naked breast,
Delights to catch the gales of life.
Now o'er the rural kingdom roves
Soft pleasure with the laughing train,
Love warbles in the vocal groves,
And vegetation plants the plain.
Unhappy! whom to beds of pain,
Whom smiling nature courts in vain,
Though rapture sings, and beauty shines.
Yet though my limbs disease invades,
Her wings imagination tries,
And bears me to the peaceful shades,
Where--s humble turrets rise;
Here stop, my soul, thy rapid flight,
Nor from the pleasing groves depart,
Where first great nature charm'd my sight,
Where wisdom first inform'd my heart.
Here let me through the vales pursue
A guide--a father--and a friend,
Once more great nature's works renew,
Once more on wisdom's voice attend.
From false caresses, causeless strife,
Wild hope, vain fear, alike remov'd,
Here let me learn the use of life,
When best enjoy'd--when most improv'd.
Teach me, thou venerable bower,
Cool meditation's quiet seat,
The gen'rous scorn of venal power,
The silent grandeur of retreat.
When pride, by guilt, to greatness climbs,
Or raging factions rush to war,
Here let me learn to shun the crimes,
I can't prevent, and will not share.
But, lest I fall by subtler foes,
Bright wisdom, teach me Curio's art,
The swelling passions to compose,
And quell the rebels of the heart.
O Phoebus! down the western sky,
Far hence diffuse thy burning ray,
Thy light to distant worlds supply,
And wake them to the cares of day.
Come, gentle eve, the friend of care,
Come, Cynthia, lovely queen of night!
Refresh me with a cooling air,
And cheer me with a lambent light:
Lay me, where o'er the verdant ground
Her living carpet nature spreads;
Where the green bow'r, with roses crown'd,
In show'rs its fragrant foliage sheds;
Improve the peaceful hour with wine;
Let musick die along the grove;
Around the bowl let myrtles twine,
And ev'ry strain be tun'd to love.
Come, Stella, queen of all my heart!
Come, born to fill its vast desires!
Thy looks perpetual joys impart,
Thy voice perpetual love inspires.
Whilst, all my wish and thine complete,
By turns we languish and we burn,
Let sighing gales our sighs repeat,
Our murmurs--murmuring brooks return,
Let me, when nature calls to rest,
And blushing skies the morn foretell,
Sink on the down of Stella's breast,
And bid the waking world farewell.
Alas! with swift and silent pace,
Impatient time rolls on the year;
The seasons change, and nature's face
Now sweetly smiles, now frowns severe,
'Twas spring, 'twas summer, all was gay,
Now autumn bends a cloudy brow;
The flow'rs of spring are swept away,
And summer-fruits desert the bough.
The verdant leaves, that play'd on high,
And wanton'd on the western breeze,
Now, trod in dust, neglected lie,
As Boreas strips the bending trees.
The fields, that way'd with golden grain,
As russet heaths, are wild and bare;
Not moist with dew, but drench'd with rain,
Nor health, nor pleasure, wanders there.
No more, while through the midnight shade,
Beneath the moon's pale orb I stray,
Soft pleasing woes my heart invade,
As Progne pours the melting lay.
From this capricious clime she soars,
Oh! would some god but wings supply!
To where each morn the spring restores,
Companion of her flight I'd fly.
Vain wish! me fate compels to bear
The downward season's iron reign;
Compels to breathe polluted air,
And shiver on a blasted plain.
What bliss to life can autumn yield,
If glooms, and show'rs, and storms prevail,
And Ceres flies the naked field,
And flowers, and fruits, and Phoebus fail?
Oh! what remains, what lingers yet,
To cheer me in the dark'ning hour!
The grape remains! the friend of wit,
In love, and mirth, of mighty pow'r.
Haste--press the clusters, fill the bowl;
Apollo! shoot thy parting ray:
This gives the sunshine of the soul,
This god of health, and verse, and day.
Still--still the jocund strain shall flow,
The pulse with vig'rous rapture beat;
My Stella with new charms shall glow,
And ev'ry bliss in wine shall meet.
No more tire morn, with tepid rays,
Unfolds the flow'r of various hue;
Noon spreads no more the genial blaze,
Nor gentle eve distils the dew.
The ling'ring hours prolong the night,
Usurping darkness shares the day;
Her mists restrain the force of light,
And Phoebus holds a doubtful sway.
By gloomy twilight, half reveal'd,
With sighs we view the hoary hill,
The leafless wood, the naked field,
The snow-topp'd cot, the frozen rill.
No musick warbles through the grove,
No vivid colours paint the plain;
No more, with devious steps, I rove
Through verdant paths, now sought in vain.
Aloud the driving tempest roars,
Congeal'd, impetuous show'rs descend;
Haste, close the window, bar the doors,
Fate leaves me Stella, and a friend.
In nature's aid, let art supply
With light and heat my little sphere;
Rouse, rouse the fire, and pile it high,
Light up a constellation here.
Let musick sound the voice of joy,
Or mirth repeat the jocund tale;
Let love his wanton wiles employ,
And o'er the season wine prevail.
Yet time life's dreary winter brings,
When mirth's gay tale shall please no more
Nor musick charm--though Stella sings;
Nor love, nor wine, the spring restore.
Catch, then, Oh! catch the transient hour,
Improve each moment as it flies;
Life's a short summer--man a flow'r:
He dies--alas! how soon he dies!
Behold, my fair, where'er we rove,
What dreary prospects round us rise;
The naked hill, the leafless grove,
The hoary ground, the frowning skies!
Nor only through the wasted plain,
Stern winter! is thy force confess'd;
Still wider spreads thy horrid reign,
I feel thy pow'r usurp my breast.
Enliv'ning hope, and fond desire,
Resign the heart to spleen and care;
Scarce frighted love maintains her fire,
And rapture saddens to despair.
In groundless hope, and causeless fear,
Unhappy man! behold thy doom;
Still changing with the changeful year,
The slave of sunshine and of gloom.
Tir'd with vain joys, and false alarms,
With mental and corporeal strife,
Snatch me, my Stella, to thy arms,
Though gold and silk their charms unite
To make thy curious web delight,
In vain the varied work would shine,
If wrought by any hand but thine;
Thy hand, that knows the subtler art
To weave those nets that catch the heart.
Spread out by me, the roving coin
Thy nets may catch, but not confine;
Nor can I hope thy silken chain
The glitt'ring vagrants shall restrain.
Why, Stella, was it then decreed,
The heart, once caught, should ne'er be freed?
When Stella strikes the tuneful string,
In scenes of imitated spring,
Where beauty lavishes her pow'rs
On beds of never-fading flow'rs,
And pleasure propagates around
Each charm of modulated sound;
Ah! think not, in the dang'rous hour,
The nymph fictitious as the flow'r;
But shun, rash youth, the gay alcove,
Nor tempt the snares of wily love.
When charms thus press on ev'ry sense,
What thought of flight, or of defence?
Deceitful hope, and vain desire,
For ever flutter o'er her lyre,
Delighting, as the youth draws nigh,
To point the glances of her eye,
And forming, with unerring art,
New chains to hold the captive heart.
But on those regions of delight
Might truth intrude with daring flight,
Could Stella, sprightly, fair, and young,
One moment hear the moral song,
Instruction, with her flowers, might spring,
And wisdom warble from her string.
Mark, when from thousand mingled dies
Thou seest one pleasing form arise,
How active light, and thoughtful shade
In greater scenes each other aid;
Mark, when the different notes agree
In friendly contrariety,
How passion's well-accorded strife
Gives all the harmony of life;
Thy pictures shall thy conduct frame,
Consistent still, though not the same;
Thy musick teach the nobler art,
To tune the regulated heart.
Ev'ning now from purple wings
Sheds the grateful gifts she brings;
Brilliant drops bedeck the mead,
Cooling breezes shake the reed;
Shake the reed, and curl the stream,
Silver'd o'er with Cynthia's beam;
Near the checquer'd, lonely grove,
Hears, and keeps thy secrets, love.
Stella, thither let us stray,
Lightly o'er the dewy way.
Phoebus drives his burning car
Hence, my lovely Stella, far;
In his stead, the queen of night
Round us pours a lambent light;
Light, that seems but just to show
Breasts that beat, and cheeks that glow.
Let us now, in whisper'd joy,
Ev'ning's silent hours employ;
Silence best, and conscious shades,
Please the hearts that love invades;
Other pleasures give them pain,
Lovers all but love disdain.
Whether Stella's eyes are found
Fix'd on earth, or glancing round,
If her face with pleasure glow,
If she sigh at others' woe,
If her easy air express
Conscious worth, or soft distress,
Stella's eyes, and air, and face,
Charm with undiminish'd grace.
If on her we see display'd
Pendent gems, and rich brocade;
If her chints with less expense
Flows in easy negligence;
Still she lights the conscious flame,
Still her charms appear the same;
If she strikes the vocal strings,
If she's silent, speaks, or sings,
If she sit, or if she move,
Still we love, and still approve.
Vain the casual, transient glance,
Which alone can please by chance;
Beauty, which depends on art,
Changing with the changing heart,
Which demands the toilet's aid,
Pendent gems and rich brocade.
I those charms alone can prize,
Which from constant nature rise,
Which nor circumstance, nor dress,
E'er can make, or more, or less.
No more thus brooding o'er yon heap,
With av'rice, painful vigils keep;
Still unenjoy'd the present store,
Still endless sighs are breath'd for more.
Oh! quit the shadow, catch the prize,
Which not all India's treasure buys!
To purchase heav'n has gold the power?
Can gold remove the mortal hour?
In life, can love be bought with gold?
Are friendship's pleasures to be sold?
No--all that's worth a wish--a thought,
Fair virtue gives unbrib'd, unbought.
Cease then on trash thy hopes to bind,
Let nobler views engage thy mind.
With science tread the wondrous way,
Or learn the muses' moral lay;
In social hours indulge thy soul,
Where mirth and temp'rance mix the bowl;
To virtuous love resign thy breast,
And be, by blessing beauty--blest.
Thus taste the feast, by nature spread,
Ere youth, and all its joys are fled;
Come, taste with me the balm of life,
Secure from pomp, and wealth, and strife.
I boast whate'er for man was meant,
In health, and Stella, and content;
And scorn! oh! let that scorn be thine!
Mere things of clay that dig the mine.
When lately Stella's form display'd
The beauties of the gay brocade,
The nymphs, who found their pow'r decline,
Proclaim'd her not so fair as fine.
"Fate! snatch away the bright disguise,
And let the goddess trust her eyes."
Thus blindly pray'd the fretful fair,
And fate malicious heard the pray'r;
But, brighten'd by the sable dress,
As virtue rises in distress,
Since Stella still extends her reign,
Ah! how shall envy sooth her pain?
Th' adoring youth and envious fair,
Henceforth, shall form one common prayer:
And love and hate, alike, implore
The skies--"That Stella mourn no more."
Not the soft sighs of vernal gales,
The fragrance of the flow'ry vales,
The murmurs of the crystal rill,
The vocal grove, the verdant hill;
Not all their charms, though all unite,
Can touch my bosom with delight.
Not all the gems on India's shore,
Not all Peru's unbounded store,
Not all the power, nor all the fame,
That heroes, kings, or poets claim;
Nor knowledge, which the learn'd approve;
To form one wish my soul can move.
Yet nature's charms allure my eyes,
And knowledge, wealth, and fame I prize;
Fame, wealth, and knowledge I obtain,
Nor seek I nature's charms in vain;
In lovely Stella all combine;
And, lovely Stella! thou art mine.
What hopes, what terrours, does thy gift create!
Ambiguous emblem of uncertain fate!
The myrtle (ensign of supreme command,
Consign'd by Venus to Melissa's hand)
Not less capricious than a reigning fair,
Oft favours, oft rejects, a lover's pray'r.
In myrtle shades oft sings the happy swain,
In myrtle shades despairing ghosts complain.
The myrtle crowns the happy lovers' heads,
Th' unhappy lovers' graves the myrtle spreads.
Oh! then, the meaning of thy gift impart,
And ease the throbbings of an anxious heart.
Soon must this bough, as you shall fix its doom,
Adorn Philander's head, or grace his tomb.
are, Dr. Johnson assured me, they were composed in the short space
of five minutes.--N.
At length, must Suffolk beauties shine in vain,
So long renown'd in B--n's deathless strain?
Thy charms, at least, fair Firebrace, might inspire
Some zealous bard to wake the sleeping lyre;
For, such thy beauteous mind and lovely face,
Thou seem'st at once, bright nymph, a muse and grace.
Ipswich, and relict of Philip Evers, esq. of that town. She became
the second wife of sir Cordell Firebrace, the last baronet of that
name, to whom she brought a fortune of 25,000 pounds, July 26, 1737.
Being again left a widow, in 1759, she was a third time married,
April 7, 1762, to William Campbell, esq. uncle to the late duke of
Argyle, and died July 3, 1782.
Ye nymphs, whom starry rays invest,
By flatt'ring poets given;
Who shine, by lavish lovers drest,
In all the pomp of heaven;
Engross not all the beams on high,
Which gild a lover's lays;
But, as your sister of the sky,
Let Lyce share the praise.
Her silver locks display the moon,
Her brows a cloudy show,
Strip'd rainbows round her eyes are seen,
And show'rs from either flow.
Her teeth the night with darkness dies,
She's starr'd with pimples o'er;
Her tongue, like nimble lightning, plies,
And can with thunder roar.
But some Zelinda, while I sing,
Denies my Lyce shines;
And all the pens of Cupid's wing
Attack my gentle lines.
Yet, spite of fair Zelinda's eye,
And all her bards express,
My Lyce makes as good a sky,
And I but flatter less.
Condemn'd to hope's delusive mine,
As on we toil, from day to day,
By sudden blasts, or slow decline,
Our social comforts drop away.
Well try'd, through many a varying year,
See Levet to the grave descend,
Officious, innocent, sincere,
Of ev'ry friendless name the friend.
Yet still he fills affection's eye,
Obscurely wise, and coarsely kind;
Nor, letter'd arrogance, deny
Thy praise to merit unrefined.
When fainting nature call'd for aid,
And hov'ring death prepar'd the blow,
His vig'rous remedy display'd
The pow'r of art, without the show.
In mis'ry's darkest cavern known,
His useful care was ever nigh,
Where hopeless anguish pour'd his groan,
And lonely want retir'd to die.
No summons, mock'd by chill delay,
No petty gain, disdain'd by pride;
The modest wants of ev'ry day
The toil of ev'ry day supply'd.
His virtues walk'd their narrow round,
Nor made a pause, nor left a void;
And sure the eternal master found
The single talent well-employ'd.
The busy day--the peaceful night,
Unfelt, uncounted, glided by;
His frame was firm--his pow'rs were bright,
Though now his eightieth year was nigh.
Then, with no fiery throbbing pain,
No cold gradations of decay,
Death broke, at once, the vital chain,
And freed his soul the nearest way.
heart; and this is the only poem, from the pen of Johnson, that has
been bathed with tears." Levet was Johnson's constant and attentive
companion, for near forty years; he was a practitioner in physic,
among the lower class of people, in London. Humanity, rather than
desire of gain, seems to have actuated this single hearted and
amiable being; and never were the virtues of charity recorded in
more touching strains. "I am acquainted," says Dr. Drake, "with
nothing superior to them in the productions of the moral muse." See
Drake's Literary Life of Johnson; and Boswell, i. ii. iii. iv.--ED.
Phillips! whose touch harmonious could remove
The pangs of guilty pow'r, and hapless love,
Rest here, distress'd by poverty no more,
Find here that calm thou gay'st so oft before;
Sleep, undisturb'd, within this peaceful shrine,
Till angels wake thee, with a note like thine.
nevertheless, recognised as Johnson's, in a memorandum of his
handwriting, and were probably written at her request. This Phillips
was a fiddler, who travelled up and down Wales, and was much
celebrated for his skill. The above epitaph, according to Mr.
Boswell, won the applause of lord Kames, prejudiced against Johnson
as he was. It was published in Mrs. Williams's Miscellanies, and
was, at first, ascribed to Garrick, from its appearing with the
signature G.--Garrick, however, related, that they were composed,
almost impromptu, by Johnson, on hearing some lines on the subject,
by Dr. Wilkes, which he disapproved. See Boswell, i. 126, where is,
likewise, preserved an epigram, by Johnson, on Colley Cibber and
George the second, whose illiberal treatment of artists and learned
men was a constant theme of his execration. As it has not yet been
inserted among Johnson's works, we will present it to the readers of
the present edition, in this note.
Honorabilis admodum THOMAS HANMER,
Baronnettus,
Augustus still survives in Maro's strain,
And Spenser's verse prolongs Eliza's reign;
Great George's acts let tuneful Gibber sing;
For nature formed the poet for the king.
Wilhelmi Hanmer armigeri, e Peregrina Henrici
North
De Mildenhall, in Com. Suffolciae, baronetti sorore
et haerede,
Filius;
Johannis Hanmer de Hanmer baronetti
Haeres patruelis
Antiquo gentis suae et titulo et patrimonio successit.
Duas uxores sortitus est;
Alteram Isabellam, honore a patre derivato, de
Arlington comitissam,
Deinde celsissimi principis, ducis de Grafton, viduam
dotariam:
Alteram Elizabetham, Thomae Foulkes de Barton, in
Com. Suff. armigeri
Filiam et haeredem.
Inter humanitatis studia feliciter enutritus,
Omnes liberalium artium disciplinas avide arripuit,
Quas morum suavitate baud leviter ornavit,
Postquam excessit ex ephebis,
Continuo inter populares suos fama eminens,
Et comitatus sui legatus ad parliamentum missus,
Ad ardua regni negotia, per annos prope triginta,
se accinxit:
Cumque, apud illos amplissimorum virorum ordines,
Solent nihil temere effutire,
Sed probe perpensa diserte expromere,
Orator gravis et pressus,
Non minus integritatis quam eloquentiae laude
commendatus,
Aeque omnium, utcunque inter se alioqui dissidentium,
Aures atque arrimos attraxit.
Annoque demum M.DCC.XIII. regnante Anna,
Felicissimae florentissimaeque memoriae regina,
Ad prolocutoris cathedram,
Communi senatus universi voce, designatus est:
Quod munus,
Cum nullo tempore non difficile,
Tum illo certe, negotiis
Et variis, et lubricis, et implicatis, difficillimum,
Cum dignitate sustinuit.
Honores alios, et omnia quae sibi in lucrum cederent
munera,
Sedulo detrectavit,
Ut rei totus inserviret publicae;
Justi rectique tenax,
Et fide in patriam incorrupta notus.
Ubi omnibus, quae virum civemque bonum decent,
officiis satisfecisset,
Paulatim se a publicis consiliis in otium recipiens,
Inter literarum amoenitates,
Inter ante-actae vitae baud insuaves recordationes,
Inter amicorum convictus et amplexus,
Honorifice consenuit;
Et bonis omnibus, quibus charissimus vixit,
Desideratissimus obiit.
Hie, juxta cineres avi, suos condi voluit, et curavit
Gulielmus Bunbury B'ttus, nepos et haeres.
BY DR. JOHNSON (b).
Thou, who survey'st these walls with curious eye,
Pause at the tomb, where Hanmer's ashes lie;
His various worth, through vary'd life, attend,
And learn his virtues, while thou mourn'st his end.
His force of genius burn'd, in early youth,
With thirst of knowledge, and with love of truth;
His learning, join'd with each endearing art,
Charm'd ev'ry ear, and gain'd on ev'ry heart.
Thus early wise, th' endanger'd realm to aid,
His country call'd him from the studious shade;
In life's first bloom his publick toils began,
At once commenc'd the senator and man.
In bus'ness dext'rous, weighty in debate,
Thrice ten long years he labour'd for the state;
In ev'ry speech persuasive wisdom flow'd,
In ev'ry act refulgent virtue glow'd:
Suspended faction ceas'd from rage and strife,
To hear his eloquence, and praise his life.
Resistless merit fix'd the senate's choice,
Who hail'd him speaker, with united voice.
Illustrious age! how bright thy glories shone,
When Hanmer fill'd the chair--and Anne the throne!
Then, when dark arts obscur'd each fierce debate,
When mutual frauds perplex'd the maze of state,
The moderator firmly mild appear'd--
Beheld with love--with veneration heard.
This task perform'd--he sought no gainful post,
Nor wish'd to glitter, at his country's cost:
Strict on the right he fix'd his steadfast eye,
With temp'rate zeal and wise anxiety;
Nor e'er from virtue's paths was lur'd aside,
To pluck the flow'rs of pleasure, or of pride.
Her gifts despis'd, corruption blush'd, and fled,
And fame pursu'd him, where conviction led.
Age call'd, at length, his active mind to rest,
With honour sated, and with cares oppress'd;
To letter'd ease retir'd, and honest mirth,
To rural grandeur and domestick worth;
Delighted still to please mankind, or mend,
The patriot's fire yet sparkled in the friend.
Calm conscience, then, his former life survey'd,
And recollected toils endear'd the shade,
Till nature call'd him to the gen'ral doom,
And virtue's sorrow dignified his tomb.
Latin is there said to be written by Dr. Freind. Of the person whose
memory it celebrates, a copious account may be seen in the appendix
to the supplement to the Biographia Britannica.
Bright Stella, form'd for universal reign,
Too well you know to keep the slaves you gain;
When in your eyes resistless lightnings play,
Aw'd into love our conquer'd hearts obey,
And yield reluctant to despotick sway:
But, when your musick sooths the raging pain,
We bid propitious heav'n prolong your reign,
We bless the tyrant, and we hug the chain.
When old Timotheus struck the vocal string,
Ambition's fury fir'd the Grecian king:
Unbounded projects lab'ring in his mind,
He pants for room, in one poor world confin'd.
Thus wak'd to rage, by musick's dreadful pow'r,
He bids the sword destroy, the flame devour.
Had Stella's gentle touches mov'd the lyre,
Soon had the monarch felt a nobler fire;
No more delighted with destructive war,
Ambitious only now to please the fair,
Resign'd his thirst of empire to her charms,
And found a thousand worlds in Stella's arms.
Turton, the lady to whom they are addressed by her maiden name of
Hickman, must have been written, at least, as early as 1734, as that
was the year of her marriage: at how much earlier a period of Dr.
Johnson's life they might have been written, is not known.
Turn on the prudent ant thy heedful eyes,
Observe her labours, sluggard, and be wise:
No stern command, no monitory voice,
Prescribes her duties, or directs her choice;
Yet, timely provident, she hastes away,
To snatch the blessings of the plenteous day;
When fruitful summer loads the teeming plain,
She crops the harvest, and she stores the grain.
How long shall sloth usurp thy useless hours,
Unnerve thy vigour, and enchain thy pow'rs;
While artful shades thy downy couch inclose,
And soft solicitation courts repose?
Amidst the drowsy charms of dull delight,
Year chases year with unremitted flight,
Till want now following, fraudulent and slow,
Shall spring to seize thee like an ambush'd foe.
The snow, dissolv'd, no more is seen,
The fields and woods, behold! are green;
The changing year renews the plain,
The rivers know their banks again;
The sprightly nymph and naked grace
The mazy dance together trace;
The changing year's successive plan
Proclaims mortality to man;
Rough winter's blasts to spring give way,
Spring yields to summer's sov'reign ray;
Then summer sinks in autumn's reign,
And winter chills the world again;
Her losses soon the moon supplies,
But wretched man, when once he lies
Where Priam and his sons are laid,
Is nought but ashes and a shade.
Who knows if Jove, who counts our score,
Will toss us in a morning more?
What with your friend you nobly share,
At least you rescue from your heir.
Not you, Torquatus, boast of Rome,
When Minos once has fixed your doom,
Or eloquence, or splendid birth,
Or virtue, shall restore to earth.
Hippolytus, unjustly slain,
Diana calls to life in vain;
Nor can the might of Theseus rend
The chains of hell that hold his friend.
Nov. 1784.
The following translations, parodies, and burlesque verses, most of them
extempore, are taken from Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson, published by Mrs.
Piozzi.
Lovely courier of the sky,
Whence and whither dost thou fly?
Scatt'ring, as thy pinions play,
Liquid fragrance all the way:
Is it business? is it love?
Tell me, tell me, gentle dove.
Soft Anacreon's vows I bear,
Vows to Myrtale the fair;
Grac'd with all that charms the heart,
Blushing nature, smiling art.
Venus, courted by an ode,
On the bard her dove bestow'd:
Vested with a master's right,
Now Anacreon rules my flight;
His the letters that you see,
Weighty charge, consign'd to me:
Think not yet my service hard,
Joyless task without reward;
Smiling at my master's gates,
Freedom my return awaits;
But the lib'ral grant in vain
Tempts me to be wild again.
Can a prudent dove decline
Blissful bondage such as mine?
Over hills and fields to roam,
Fortune's guest without a home;
Under leaves to hide one's head
Slightly shelter'd, coarsely fed:
Now my better lot bestows
Sweet repast and soft repose;
Now the gen'rous bowl I sip,
As it leaves Anacreon's lip:
Void of care, and free from dread,
From his fingers snatch his bread;
Then, with luscious plenty gay,
Round his chamber dance and play;
Or from wine, as courage springs,
O'er his face extend my wings;
And when feast and frolick tire,
Drop asleep upon his lyre.
This is all, be quick and go,
More than all thou canst not know;
Let me now my pinions ply,
I have chatter'd like a pie.
Wheresor'er I turn my view,
All is strange, yet nothing new;
Endless labour all along,
Endless labour to be wrong;
Phrase that time hath flung away,
Uncouth words in disarray,
Trick'd in antique ruff and bonnet,
Ode, and elegy, and sonnet.
Err shall they not, who resolute explore
Times gloomy backward with judicious eyes;
And, scanning right the practices of yore,
Shall deem our hoar progenitors unwise.
They to the dome, where smoke, with curling play,
Announc'd the dinner to the regions round,
Summon'd the singer blithe, and harper gay,
And aided wine with dulcet-streaming sound.
The better use of notes, or sweet or shrill,
By quiv'ring string or modulated wind;
Trumpet or lyre--to their harsh bosoms chill
Admission ne'er had sought, or could not find.
Oh! send them to the sullen mansions dun,
Her baleful eyes where sorrow rolls around;
Where gloom-enamour'd mischief loves to dwell,
And murder, all blood-bolter'd, schemes the wound.
When cates luxuriant pile the spacious dish,
And purple nectar glads the festive hour;
The guest, without a want, without a wish,
Can yield no room to musick's soothing pow'r.
The rites deriv'd from ancient days,
With thoughtless reverence we praise;
The rites that taught us to combine
The joys of musick and of wine,
And bade the feast, and song, and bowl
O'erfill the saturated soul:
But ne'er the flute or lyre applied
To cheer despair, or soften pride;
Nor call'd them to the gloomy cells
Where want repines and vengeance swells;
Where hate sits musing to betray,
And murder meditates his prey.
To dens of guilt and shades of care,
Ye sons of melody repair,
Nor deign the festive dome to cloy
With superfluities of joy.
Ah! little needs the minstrel's power
To speed the light convivial hour.
The board, with varied plenty crown'd,
exquisite original in immediate comparison with this translation;
we, therefore, subjoin it, and also Dr. J. Warton's imitation of
the same passage.
skaious de legon kouden ti sophous
tous prosthe brotous, ouk an amartois
oitines umnous epi men thaliais,
epi d'eilapinais kai para deipnois
euronto biou terpnas akoas
stugious de broton oudeis pulas
eureto mousae kai poluchordois
odais pauein, exon thanatoi
deinai te tuchai sphallonsi domous
kaitoi tade men kerdos akeisthai
molpaisi brotous ina d'endeipnoi
daites ti mataen teinousi boan
to paron gar echei terpsin aph auton
daitos plaeroma brotaoisin
Queen of every moving measure,
Sweetest source of purest pleasure,
Music! why thy pow'rs employ
Only for the sons of joy;
Only for the smiling guests,
At natal or at nuptial feasts?
Rather thy lenient numbers pour
On those, whom secret griefs devour,
Bid be still the throbbing hearts
Of those whom death or absence parts,
And, with some softly whisper'd air,
Sooth the brow of dumb despair.
and was inserted, as the work of "a learned friend," in that
gentleman's History of Musick, vol. ii. p. 340. It has always been
ascribed to Johnson; but, to put the matter beyond a doubt, Mr.
Malone ascertained the fact by applying to Dr. Burney himself. J. B.
Glassy water, glassy water,
Down whose current, clear and strong,
Chiefs confused in mutual slaughter,
Moor and Christian roll along.
Hermit hoar, in solemn cell
Wearing out life's ev'ning grey,
Strike thy bosom, sage, and tell
What is bliss, and which the way.
Thus I spoke, and speaking sigh'd,
Scarce repress'd the starting tear,
When the hoary sage reply'd,
Come, my lad, and drink some beer.
Se a quien los leones vence
Vence una muger hermosa,
O el de flaco avergonze,
O ella di ser mas furiosa.
If the man who turnips cries,
Cry not when his father dies,
'Tis a proof, that he had rather
Have a turnip than his father.
Viva, viva la padrona!
Tutta bella, e tutta buona,
La padrona e un' angiolella
Tutta buona e tutta bella;
Tutta bella e tutta buona;
Viva! viva la padrona!
Long may live my lovely Hetty!
Always young, and always pretty;
Always pretty, always young,
Live, my lovely Hetty, long!
Always young, and always pretty,
Long may live my lovely Hetty!
Se al venir vostro i principi sen' vanno
Deh venga ogni di--durate un' anno.
If at your coming princes disappear,
Comets! come every day--and stay a year.
Theatre des ris, et des pleurs,
Lit! ou je nais, et ou je meurs,
Tu nous fais voir comment voisins
Sont nos plaisirs, et nos chagrins.
In bed we laugh, in bed we cry,
And, born in bed, in bed we die;
The near approach a bed may show
Of human bliss to human woe.
The hand of him here torpid lies,
That drew th' essential form of grace;
Here clos'd in death th' attentive eyes,
That saw the manners in the face.
Sur un mince cristal l'hiver conduit leurs pas,
Le precipice est sous la glace:
Telle est de nos plaisirs la legere surface:
Glissez, mortels; n'appuyez pas.
O'er ice the rapid skater flies,
With sport above, and death below;
Where mischief lurks in gay disguise,
Thus lightly touch and quickly go.
O'er crackling ice, o'er gulfs profound,
With nimble glide the skaters play;
O'er treach'rous pleasure's flow'ry ground
Thus lightly skim, and haste away.
Oft in danger, yet alive,
We are come to thirty-five;
Long may better years arrive,
Better years than thirty-five!
Could philosophers contrive
Life to stop at thirty-five,
Time his hours should never drive
O'er the bounds of thirty-five.
High to soar, and deep to dive,
Nature gives at thirty-five.
Ladies, stock and tend your hive,
Trifle not at thirty-five;
For, howe'er we boast and strive.
Life declines from thirty-five.
He that ever hopes to thrive
Must begin by thirty-five;
And all, who wisely wish to wive,
Must look on Thrale at thirty-five.
Would you hope to gain my heart,
Bid your teasing doubts depart;
He, who blindly trusts, will find
Faith from ev'ry gen'rous mind:
He, who still expects deceit,
Only teaches how to cheat.
Grown old in courts, thou surely art not one
Who keeps the rigid rules of ancient honour;
Well skill'd to sooth a foe with looks of kindness,
To sink the fatal precipice before him,
And then lament his fall, with seeming friendship:
Open to all, true only to thyself,
Thou know'st those arts, which blast with envious praise,
Which aggravate a fault, with feign'd excuses,
And drive discountenanc'd virtue from the throne;
That leave the blame of rigour to the prince,
And of his ev'ry gift usurp the merit;
That hide, in seeming zeal, a wicked purpose,
And only build upon another's ruin.
practised dissembler of a despotic court,--ED.
The tender infant, meek and mild,
Fell down upon the stone:
The nurse took up the squealing child,
But still the child squeal'd on.
Friendship, peculiar boon of heaven,
The noble mind's delight and pride,
To men and angels only given,
To all the lower world deny'd.
While love, unknown among the blest,
The savage and the human breast
With bright, but oft destructive, gleam,
Alike, o'er all his lightnings fly;
Thy lambent glories only beam
Around the fav'rites of the sky.
Thy gentle flows of guiltless joys
On fools and villains ne'er descend;
And hugs a flatt'rer for a friend.
O! guide us through life's darksome way!
And let the tortures of mistrust
On selfish bosoms only prey.
When souls to blissful climes remove:
What rais'd our virtue here below,
Shall aid our happiness above.
See Boswell's Life of Johnson, under that year. It was afterwards
printed in Mrs. Williams's Miscellanies, in 1766, with several
variations, which are pointed out, below.--J.B.
of it, we have the following, which may be suspected, from internal
evidence, not to have been Johnson's:
When virtues, kindred virtues meet,
And sister-souls together join,
Thy pleasures permanent, as great,
Are all transporting--all divine.
Had this fair figure, which this frame displays,
Adorn'd in Roman time the brightest days,
In every dome, in every sacred place,
Her statue would have breath'd an added grace,
And on its basis would have been enroll'd,
"This is Minerva, cast in virtue's mould."
Long expected one-and-twenty,
Ling'ring year, at length is flown;
Pride and pleasure, pomp and plenty,
Great----, are now your own.
Loosen'd from the minor's tether,
Free to mortgage or to sell;
Wild as wind, and light as feather,
Bid the sons of thrift farewell.
Call the Betseys, Kates, and Jennies,
All the names that banish care;
Lavish of your grandsire's guineas,
Show the spirit of an heir.
All that prey on vice or folly
Joy to see their quarry fly:
There the gamester light and jolly,
There the lender grave and sly.
Wealth, my lad, was made to wander,
Let it wander as it will;
Call the jockey, call the pander,
Bid them come, and take their fill.
When the bonny blade carouses,
Pockets full, and spirits high--
What are acres? what are houses?
Only dirt, or wet or dry.
Should the guardian friend, or mother
Tell the woes of wilful waste;
Scorn their counsel, scorn their pother,
You can hang or drown at last.
VIR impavidus, constans, animosus, periculorum immemor,
laborum patientissimus; fiducia christiana fortis, fervidusque;
paterfamilias apprime strenuus; bibliopola admodum
peritus; mente et libris et negotiis exculta; animo ita
firmo, ut, rebus adversis diu conflictatus, nec sibi nec suis
defuerit; lingua sic temperata, ut ei nihil quod aures vel
pias vel castas laesisset, aut dolor vel voluptas unquam
expresserit.
Natus Cubleiae, in agro Derbiensi, anno MDCLVI; obijt
Apposita est SARA, conjux,
Antiqua FORDORUM gente oriunda; quam domi sedulam,
foris paucis notam; nulli molestam, mentis acumine
et judicii subtilitate praecellentem; aliis multum, sibi parum
indulgentem: aeternitati semper attentam, omne fere
virtutis nomen commendavit.
Nata Nortoniae Regis, in agro Varvicensi, anno
MDCLXIX; obijt MDCCLIX.
Cum NATHANAELE, illorum filio, qui natus MDCCXII.
cum vires et animi et corporis multa pollicerentur, anno
MDCCXXXVII. vitam brevem pia morte finivit.
HIC conduntur reliquae
Antiqua JARVISIORUM gente
Peatlingae, apud Leicestrenses, ortae;
Formosae, cultae, ingeniosae, piae;
Uxoris, primis nuptiis, HENRICI PORTER,
secundis, SAMUELIS JOHNSON,
Qui multum amatam, diuque defletam,
Hoc lapide contexit.
Obijt Londini, mense Mart.
In the vault below are deposited the remains of
who, in the fifty-third year of her age,
surrounded with many worldly blessings,
heard, with fortitude and composure truly great,
the horrible malady, which had, for some time, begun to
afflict her,
pronounced incurable;
and for more than three years,
endured with patience, and concealed with decency,
the daily tortures of gradual death;
continued to divide the hours not allotted to devotion,
between the cares of her family, and the converse of
her friends;
rewarded the attendance of duty,
and acknowledged the offices of affection;
and, while she endeavoured to alleviate by cheerfulness
her husband's sufferings and sorrows,
increased them by her gratitude for his care,
and her solicitude for his quiet.
To the testimony of these virtues,
more highly honoured, as more familiarly known,
this monument is erected by
Juxta sepulta est HESTERA MARIA,
Thomae Cotton de Combermere, baronetti Cestriensis,
filia,
Johannis Salusbury, armigeri Flintiensis, uxor,
Forma felix, felix ingenio;
Omnibus jucunda, suorum amantissima.
Linguis artibusque ita exeulta,
Ut loquenti nunquam deessent
Sermonis nitor, sententiarum flosculi,
Sapientiae gravitas, leporum gratia:
Modum servandi adeo perita,
Ut domestica inter negotia literis oblectaretur;
Literarum inter delicias, rem familiarem sedulo curaret.
Multis illi multos annos precantibus
diri carcinomatis venene contabuit,
nexibusque vitae paulatim resolutis,
e terris, meliora sperans, emigravit.
Nata 1707. Nupta 1739. Obijt 1773.
Poetae, Physici, Historici,
Qui nullum fere scribendi genus
Non tetigit,
Nullum quod tetigit non ornavit:
Sive risus essent movendi,
Sive lacrimae,
Affectuum potens, at lenis, dominator:
Ingenio sublimis, vividus, versatilis,
Oratione grandis, nitidus, venustus:
Hoc monumento memoriam coluit
Sodalium amor,
Amicorum fides,
Lectorum veneratio.
Elfiniae, in Hibernia, natus MDCCXXIX.
Eblauae literis institutus:
Sheridan, Joseph Warton, &c. the celebrated _Round Robin_, composed by
Burke, intreating Johnson to write an English epitaph on an English
author. His reply was, in the genuine spirit of an old scholar, "he
would never consent to disgrace the walls of Westminster abbey with an
English inscription." One of his arguments, in favour of a common
learned language, was ludicrously cogent: "Consider, sir, how you should
feel, were you to find, at Rotterdam, an epitaph, upon Erasmus, _in
Dutch_!" Boswell, iii. He would, however, undoubtedly have written a
better epitaph in English, than in Latin. His compositions in that
language are not of first rate excellence, either in prose or verse. The
epitaph, in Stretham church, on Mr. Thrale, abounds with inaccuracies;
and those who are fond of detecting little blunders in great men, may be
amply gratified in the perusal of a review of Thrale's epitaph in the
Classical Journal, xii. 6. His Greek epitaph on Goldsmith, is not
remarkable in itself, but we will subjoin it, in this place, as a
literary curiosity.
Thon taphon eisoraas thon OLIBARIOIO, koniaen
Aphrosi mae semnaen, xeine, podessi patei.
Oisi memaele phusis, metron charis, erga palaion,
Klaiete poiaetaen, istorikon, phusikon.
Hie conditur quod reliquum est
Qui res seu civiles, seu domesticas, ita egit,
Ut vitam illi longiorem multi optarent;
Ita sacras,
Ut quam brevem esset habiturus praescire videretur;
Simplex, apertus, sibique semper similis,
Nihil ostentavit aut arte fictum, aut cura
elaboratum.
In senatu, regi patriaeque
Fideliter studuit,
Vulgi obstrepentis contemptor animosus;
Domi, inter mille mercaturae negotia,
Literarum elegantiam minime neglexit.
Amicis, quocunque modo laborantibus,
Consiliis, auctoritate, muneribus, adfuit.
Inter familiares, comites, convivas, hospites,
Tam facili fuit morum suavitate
Ut omnium animos ad se alliceret;
Tam felici sermonis libertate,
Ut nulli adulatus, omnibus placeret.
Natus 1724. Obijt 1781.
Consortes tumuli habet Rodolphum, patrem, strenuum
fortemque virum, et Henricum, filium unicum, quem
spei parentum mors inopiua decennem proripuit.
Ita
Domus felix et opulenta quam erexit
Avus, auxitque pater, cum nepote decidit.
Abi, Viator,
Et, vicibus rerum humanarum perspectis,
Aeternitatem cogita!
Ex alieno ingenio poeta, ex suo tantum versificator.
SCALIG. Poet.
Tollite concentum, Solymaeae tollite nymphae,
Nil mortale loquor; coelum mihi carminis alta
Materies; poscunt gravius coelestia plectrum.
Muscosi fontes, sylvestria tecta, valete,
Aonidesque deae, et mendacis somnia Pindi:
Tu, mihi, qui flamma movisti pectora sancti
Siderea Isaiae, dignos accende furores!
Immatura calens rapitur per secula vates
Sic orsus--Qualis rerum mihi nascitur ordo!
Virgo! virgo parit! Felix radicibus arbor
Jessaeis surgit, mulcentesque sethera flores
Coelestes lambunt animae, ramisque columba,
Nuncia sacra Dei, plaudentibus insidet alis.
Nectareos rores, alimentaque mitia coelum
Praebeat, et tacite foecundos irriget imbres.
Hue, foedat quos lepra, urit quos febris, adeste,
Dia salutares spirant medicamina rami;
Hic requies fessis: non sacra sacvit in umbra
Vis boreae gelida, aut rapidi violeutia solis.
Irrita vanescent priscae vestigia fraudis,
Justitiaeque manus, pretio intemerata, bilancem
Attollet reducis; bellis praetendet olivas
Compositis pax alma suas, terrasque revisens
Sedatas niveo virtus lucebit amictu.--
Volvantur celeres anni! lux purpuret ortum
Expectata diu! naturae claustra refringens,
Nascere, magne puer! tibi primas, ecce, corollas
Deproperat tellus, fundit tibi munera, quicquid
Carpit Arabs, hortis quicquid frondescit Eois;
Altius, en! Lebanon gaudentia culmina tollit;
En! summo exultant nutantes vertice sylvae:
Mittit aromaticas vallis Saronica nubes,
Et juga Carmeli recreant fragrantia coelum.
Deserti laeta mollescunt aspera voce:
Auditur Deus! ecce Deus! reboantia circum
Saxa sonant, Deus! ecce Deus! deflectitur aether,
Demissumque Deum tellus capit; ardua cedrus,
Gloria sylvarum, dominum inclinata salutet:
Surgite convalles, tumidi subsidite montes!
Sternite saxa viam, rapidi discedite fluctus;
En! quem turba diu cecinerunt enthea, vates,
En! salvator adest; vultus agnoscite, caeci,
Divinos, surdos sacra vox permulceat aures.
Ille cutim spissam visus hebetare vetabit,
Reclusisque oculis infundet amabile lumen;
Obstrictasque diu linguas in carmina solvet.
Ille vias vocis pandet, flexusque liquentis
Harmoniae purgata novos mirabitur auris.
Accrescunt teneris tactu nova robora nervis:
Consuetus fulcro innixus reptare bacilli
Nunc saltu capreas, nunc cursu provocat euros.
Non planctus, non moesta sonant suspiria; pectus
Singultans mulcet, lachrymantes tergit ocellos.
Vincla coercebunt luctantem adamantina mortem,
Aeternoque orci dominator vuluere languens
Invalidi raptos sceptri plorabit honores.
Ut, qua dulce strepunt scatebrse, qua lasta virescunt
Pascua, qua blandum spirat purissimus aer,
Pastor agit pecudes, teneros modo suscipit agnos,
Et gremio fotis selectas porrigit herbas,
Amissas modo quserit oves, revocatque vagantes;
Fidus adest custos, seu nox furat humida nimbis,
Sive dies medius morieutia torreat arva.
Postera sic pastor divinus secla beabit,
Et curas felix patrias testabitur orbis.
Non ultra infestis concurrent agmina signis,
Hostiles oculis flammas jaculantia torvis;
Non litui accendent bellum, non campus ahenis
Triste coruscabit radiis; dabit hasta recusa
Vomerem, et in falcem rigidus curvabitur ensis.
Atria, pacis opus, surgent, finemque caduci
Natus ad optatum perducet coepta parentis.
Qui duxit sulcos, illi teret area messem,
Et serae texent vites umbracula proli.
Attoniti dumeta vident inculta coloni
Suave rubere rosis, sitientesque inter arenas
Garrula mirantur salientis murmura rivi.
Per saxa, ignivomi nuper spelaea draconis,
Canna viret, juncique tremit variabilis umbra.
Horruit implexo qua vallis sente, figurae
Surgit amans abies teretis, buxique sequaces
Artificis frondent dextrae; palmisque rubeta
Aspera, odoratae cedunt mala gramiua myrto.
Per valles sociata lupo lasciviet agna,
Cumque leone petet tutus praesepe juvencus.
Florea mansuetae petulantes vincula tigri
Per ludum pueri injicient, et fessa colubri
Membra viatoris recreabunt frigore linguae.
Serpentes teneris nil jam lethale micantes
Tractabit palmis infans, motusque trisulcae
Bidebit linguae innocuos, squamasque virentes
Aureaque admirans rutilantis fulgura cristae.
Indue reginam, turritae frontis honores
Tolle Salema sacros, quam circum gloria pennas
Explicat, incinctam radiatae luce tiaras!
En! formosa tibi spatiosa per atria proles
Ordinibus surgit densis, vitamque requirit
Impatiens, lenteque fluentes increpat annos.
Ecce peregrinis fervent tua limina turbis;
Barbarus, en! clarum divino lumine templum
Ingreditur, cultuque tuo mansuescere gaudet.
Cinnameos cumulos, Nabathaei munera veris,
Ecce! cremant genibus tritae regalibus arae.
Solis Ophyraeis crudum tibi montibus aurum
Maturant radii; tibi balsama sudat Idume.
Aetheris en! portas sacro fulgore micantes
Coelicolae pandunt, torrentis aurea lucis
Flumina prorumpunt; non posthac sole rubescet
India nascenti, placidaeve argentea noctis
Luna vices revehet; radios pater ipse diei
Proferet archetypos; coelestis gaudia lucis
Ipso fonte bibes, quae circumfusa beatam
Regiam inundabit, nullis cessura tenebris.
Littora deficiens arentia deseret aequor;
Sidera fumabunt, diro labefaeta tremore
Saxa cadent, solidique liquescent robora montis:
Tu secura tamen confusa elementa videbis,
Laetaque Messia semper dominabere rege,
Pollicitis firmata Dei, stabilita ruinis.
edition of Pope, vol. i. p. 105, 8vo. 1797. It certainly contains
some expressions that are not classical. Let it be remembered,
however, that it was a college exercise, performed with great
rapidity, and was, at first, praised, beyond all suspicion of
defect--This translation was first published in a Miscellany of
Poems by several hands. Published by J. Husbands, A.M. fellow of
Pembroke college, Oxon. 8vo. Oxford, 1731. Of Johnson's production,
Mr. Husbands says, in his preface, "The translation of Mr. Pope's
Messiah was delivered to his tutor as a college exercise, by Mr.
Johnson, a commoner of Pembroke college in Oxford, and 'tis hoped
will be no discredit to the excellent original." Mr. Husbands died
in the following year.
Vitae qui varias vices
Rerum perpetuus temperat arbiter,
Laeto cedere lumini
Noctis tristitiam qui gelidae jubet,
Acri sanguine turgidos,
Obductosque oculos nubibus humidis
Sanari voluit meos;
Et me, cuncta beaus cui nocuit dies,
Luci reddidit et mihi.
Qua te laude, Deus, qua prece prosequar?
Sacri discipulis libri
Te semper studiis utilibus colam:
Grates, summe pater, tuis
Recte qui fruitur muneribus, dedit.
Nunc dies Christo memoranda nato
Fulsit, in pectus mihi fonte purum
Gaudium sacro fluat, et benigni
Gratia coeli!
Christe, da tutam trepido quietem,
Christe, spem praesta stabilem timenti;
Da fidem certam, precibusque fidis
Annue, Christe.
Summe Deus, qui semper amas quodcunque creasti;
Judice quo, scelerum est poenituisse salus:
Da veteres noxas animo sic flere novato,
Per Christum ut veniam sit reperire mihi.
Spe non inani confugis,
Peccator, ad latus meum;
Quod poscis, hand unquam tibi
Negabitur solatium.
paralytic stroke had deprived him of his voice; and, in the anxiety
he felt, lest it should, likewise, have impaired his understanding,
he composed the above lines, and said, concerning them, that he
knew, at the time, that they were not good, but then, that he deemed
his discerning this to be sufficient for quieting the anxiety before
mentioned, as it showed him, that his power of judging was not
diminished.
Summe dator vitae, naturae aeterne magister,
Causarum series quo moderante fluit,
Respice quem subiget senium, morbique seniles,
Quem terret vitae meta propinqua suae,
Respice inutiliter lapsi quem poenitet aevi;
Recte ut poeniteat, respice, magne parens.
Pater benigne, summa semper lenitas,
Crimine gravatam plurimo mentem leva:
Concede veram poenitentiam, precor,
Concede agendam legibus vitam tuis.
Sacri vagantes luminis gressus face
Rege, et tuere; quae nocent pellens procul:
Veniam petenti, summe, da veniam, pater;
Veniaeque sancta pacis adde gaudia:
Sceleris ut expers, omni et vacuus metu,
Te, mente pura, mente tranquilla colam,
Mihi dona morte haec impetret Christus sua.
Summe pater, puro collustra lumine pectus,
Anxietas noceat ne tenebrosa mihi.
In me sparsa manu virtutum semina larga
Sic ale, proveniat messis ut ampla boni.
Noctes atque dies animo spes laeta recurset;
Certa mihi sancto flagret amore fides;
Certa vetat dubitare fides, spes laeta timere;
Velle vetet cuiquam non bene sanctus amor.
Da, ne sint permissa, pater, mihi praemia frustra,
Et colere, et leges semper amare tuas.
Haec mihi, quo gentes, quo secula, Christe, piasti,
Sanguine, precanti promereare tuo!
Mens mea, quid quereris? veniet tibi mollior hora,
In summo ut videas numine laeta patrem;
Divinam insontes iram placavit Iesus;
Nunc est pro poena poenituisse reis.
Qui cupit in sanctos, Christo cogente, referri,
Abstergat mundi labem, nec gaudia carnis
Captans, nec fastu tumidus, semperque futuro
Instet, et evellens terroris spicula corde,
Suspiciat tandem clementem in numine patrem.
Huic quoque, nec genti nec sectae noxius ulli,
Sit sacer orbis amor, miseris qui semper adesse
Gestiat, et, nullo pietatis limite clausus,
Cunctorum ignoscat vitiis, pictate fruatur.
Ardeat huic toto sacer ignis pectore, possit
Ut vitam, poscat si res, impendere vero.
Cura placere Deo sit prima, sit ultima; sanctae
Irruptum vitae cupiat servare tenorem;
Et sibi, delirans quanquam et peccator in horas
Displiceat, servet tutum sub pectore rectum:
Nec natet, et nunc has partes, nunc eligat illas,
Nec dubitet quem dicat herum, sed, totus in uno,
Se fidum addicat Christo, mortalia temnens.
Sed timeat semper, caveatque ante omnia, turbae
Ne stolidae similis, leges sibi segreget audax
Quas servare velit, leges quas lentus omittat,
Plenum opus effugiens, aptans juga mollia collo,
Sponte sua demens; nihilum decedere summae
Vult Deus, at qui cuncta dedit tibi, cuncta reposcit.
Denique perpetuo contendit in ardua nisu,
Auxilioque Dei fretus, jam mente serena
Pergit, et imperiis sentit se dulcibus actum.
Paulatim mores, animum, vitamque refingit,
Effigiemque Dei, quantum servare licebit,
Induit, et, terris major, coelestia spirat.
Aeterne rerum conditor,
Salutis aeternae dator;
Felicitatis sedibus
Qui nec scelestos exigis,
Quoscumque scelerum poenitet;
Da, Christe, poenitentiam,
Veniamque, Christe, da mihi;
Aegrum trahenti spiritum
Succurre praesens corpori;
Multo gravatam crimine
Mentem benignus alleva.
Luce collustret mihi pectus alma,
Pellat et tristes animi tenebras,
Nec sinat semper tremere ac dolere,
Gratia Christi.
Me pater tandem reducem benigno
Summus amplexu foveat, beato
Me gregi sanctus socium beatum
Spiritus addat.
Serviat ut menti corpus jejunia serva,
Ut mens utatur corpore, sume cibos.
Urbane, nullis fesse laboribus,
Urbane, nullis victe calumniis,
Cui fronte sertum in erudita
Perpetuo viret, et virebit;
Quid moliatur gens imitantium,
Quid et minetur, solicitus parum,
Vacare solis perge musis,
Juxta animo, studiisque foelix.
Linguae procacis plumbea spicula,
Fidens, superbo frange silentio;
Victrix per obstantes catervas
Sedulitas animosa tendet.
Intende nervos fortis, inanibus
Risurus olim nisibus emuli;
Intende jam nervos, habebis
Participes opera Camoenas.
Non ulla musis pagina gratior,
Quam quae severis ludicra jungere
Novit, fatigatamque nugis
Utilibus recreare mentem.
Texente nymphis serta Lycoride,
Rosae ruborem sic viola adjuvat
Immista, sic Iris refulget
Aethereis variata fucis.
vol. liv.
Errat adhuc vitreus per prata virentia rivus,
Quo toties lavi membra tenella puer;
Hic delusa rudi frustrabar brachia motu,
Dum docuit, blanda voce, natare pater.
Fecerunt rami latebras, tenebrisque diurnis
Pendula secretas abdidit arbor aquas.
Nunc veteres duris periere securibus umbrae,
Longinquisque oculis nuda lavacra patent.
Lympha, tamen, cursus agit indefessa perennis,
Tectaque qua fluxit, nunc et aperta fluit.
Quid ferat externi velox, quid deterat aetas,
Tu quoque securus res age, Nise, tuas.
Lexicon ad finem longo luctamine tandem
Scaliger ut duxit, tenuis pertaesus opellae,
Vile indignatus studium, nugasque molestas
Ingemit exosus, scribendaque lexica mandat
Damnatis, poenam pro poenis omnibus unam.
Ille quidem recte, sublimis, doctus et acer,
Quem decuit majora sequi, majoribus aptum,
Qui veterum modo facta ducum, modo carmina vatum,
Gesserat, et quicquid virtus, sapientia quicquid
Dixerat, imperiique vices, coelique meatus,
Ingentemque animo seclorum volveret orbem.
Fallimur exemplis; temere sibi turba scholarum
Ima tuas credit permitti, Scaliger, iras.
Quisque suum norit modulum; tibi, prime virorum,
Ut studiis sperem, aut ausim par esse querelis,
Non mihi sorte datum; lenti seu sanguinis obsint
Frigora, seu nimium longo jacuisse veterno,
Sive mihi mentem dederit natura minorem.
Te sterili functum cura, vocumque salebris
Tuto eluctatum, spatiis sapientia dia
Excipit aethereis, ars omnis plaudit amico,
Linguarumque omni terra discordia concors
Multiplici reducem circumsonat ore magistrum.
Me, pensi immunis cum jam mihi reddor, inertis
Desidiae sors dura manet, graviorque labore
Tristis et atra quies, et tardae taedia vitae.
Nascuntur curis curae, vexatque dolorum
Importuna cohors, vacuae mala somnia mentis.
Nunc clamosa juvant nocturnae gaudia mensae,
Nunc loca sola placent; frustra te, somne, recumbens,
Alme voco, impatiens noctis, metuensque diei.
Omnia percurro trepidus, circum omnia lustro,
Si qua usquam pateat melioris semita vitae,
Nec quid again invenio; meditatus grandia, cogor
Notior ipse mihi fieri, incultumque fateri
Pectus, et ingenium vano se robore jactans.
Ingenium, nisi materiem doctrina ministrat,
Cessat inops rerum, ut torpet, si marmoris absit
Copia, Phidiaci foecunda potentia coeli.
Quicquid agam, quocunque ferar, conatibus obstat
Res angusta domi, et macrae penuria mentis.
Non rationis opes animus, nunc parta recensens
Conspicit aggestas, et se miratur in illis,
Nec sibi de gaza praesens quod postulat usus
Summus adesse jubet celsa dominator ab arce;
Non, operum serie seriem dum computat aevi,
Praeteritis fruitur, laetos aut sumit honores
Ipse sui judex, actae bene munera vitae;
Sed sua regna videns, loca nocte silentia late
Horret, ubi vanae species, umbraeque fugaces,
Et rerum volitant rarae per inane figurae.
Quid faciam? tenebrisne pigram damnare senectam
Restat? an accingar studiis gravioribus audax?
Aut, hoc si nimium est, tandem nova lexica poscam?
Genius of Dr. Johnson, prefixed to the present volume.
Cum filium peregre agentem desiderio nimis tristi prosequeretur.
Fateris ergo, quod populus solet
Crepare vecors, nil sapientiam
Prodesse vitae, literasque
In dubiis dare terga rebus.
Tu, queis laborat sors hominum, mala
Nec vincis acer, nee pateris pius;
Te mille succorum potentem
Destituit medicina mentis.
Per caeca noctis taedia turbidae,
Pigrae per horas lucis inutiles,
Torpesque, languescisque, curis
Solicitus nimis heu! paternis.
Tandem dolori plus satis est datum,
Exsurge fortis, nunc animis opus,
Te, docta, Laurenti, vetustas,
Te medici revocant labores.
Permitte summo quicquid habes patri,
Permitte fidens; et muliebribus,
Amice, majorem querelis
Redde tuis, tibi redde, mentem.
Tertii verso quater orbe lustri,
Quid theatrales tibi, Crispe, pompae?
Quam decet canos male litteratos
Sera voluptas!
Tene mulceri fidibus canoris?
Tene cantorum modulis stupere?
Tene per pictas, oculo elegante,
Currere formas?
Inter aequales, sine felle liber,
Codices, veri studiosus, inter
Rectius vives. Sua quisque carpat
Gaudia gratus.
Lusibus gaudet puer otiosis,
Luxus oblectat juvenem theatri,
At seni fluxo sapienter uti
Tempore restat.
Parva quidem regio, sed religione priorum
Clara, Caledonias panditur inter aquas.
Voce ubi Cennethus populos domuisse feroces
Dicitur, et vanos dedocuisse deos.
Huc ego delatus placido per caerulea cursu,
Scire locus volui quid daret iste novi.
Illic Leniades humili regnabat in aula,
Leniades, magnis nobilitatus avis.
Una duas cepit casa cum genitore puellas,
Quas amor undarum crederet esse deas.
Nec tamen inculti gelidis latuere sub antris,
Accola Danubii qualia saevus habet.
Mollia non desunt vacuae solatia vitae,
Sive libros poscant otia, sive lyram.
Fulserat ilia dies, legis qua docta supernae
Spes hominum et curas gens procul esse jubet.
Ut precibus justas avertat numinis iras,
Et summi accendat pectus amore boni.
Ponte inter strepitus non sacri munera cultus
Cessarunt, pietas hic quoque cura fuit:
Nil opus est aeris sacra de turre sonantis
Admonitu, ipsa suas nunciat hora vices.
Quid, quod sacrifici versavit foemina libros.
Sint pro legitimis pura labella sacris--
Quo vagor ulterius? quod ubique requiritur hic est;
Hic secura quies, hic et honestus amor.
Ponti profundis clausa recessibus,
Strepens procellis, rupibus obsita,
Quam grata defesso virentem,
Skia, sinum nebulosa pandis!
His cura, credo, sedibus exulat;
His blanda certe pax habitat locis;
Non ira, non moeror quietis
Insidias meditatur horis.
At non cavata rupe latescere,
Menti nec aegrae montibus aviis
Prodest vagari, nec frementes
In specula numerare fluctus.
Humana virtus non sibi sufficit;
Datur nec aequum cuique animum sibi
Parare posse, utcunque jactet
Grandiloquus nimis alta Zeno.
Exaestuantis pectoris impetum,
Rex summe, solus tu regis, arbiter;
Mentisque, te tollente, fluctus;
Te, resident, moderante fluctus.
Permeo terras, ubi nuda rupes
Saxeas miscet nebulis ruinas,
Torva ubi rident steriles coloni
Rura labores.
Pervagor gentes hominum ferorum,
Vita ubi nullo decorata cultu
Squallet informis, tugurique fumis
Foeda latescit.
Inter erroris salebrosa longi,
Inter ignotae strepitus loquelae,
Quot modis, mecum, quid agat, requiro,
Thralia dulcis?
Seu viri curas pia nupta mulcet,
Seu fovet mater sobolem benigna,
Sive cum libris novitate pascit
Sedula mentem.
Sit memor nostri, fideique solvat
Fida mercedem, meritoque blandum
Thraliae discant resonare nomen
Littora Skiae.
Apr. 16, 1783.
Hora sic peragit citata cursum;
Sic diem sequitur dies fugacem!
Spes novas nova lux parit, secunda
Spondens omnia credulis homullis;
Spes ludit stolidas, metuque caeco
Lux angit, miseros ludens homullos.
Perpetui, ambita bis terra, praemia lactis
Haec habet, altrici capra secunda Jovis.
Liber ut esse velim, suasisti, pulchra Maria:
Ut maneam liber, pulchra Maria, vale.
Hora perit furtim laetis, mens temporis aegra
Pigritiam incusat, nec minus hora perit.
Quas navis recipit, quantum sit pondus aquarum,
Dimidrum tanti ponderis intret onus.
Quot vox missa pedes abit, horae parte secunda?
Undecies centum denos quater adde duosque.
Eiden Alaetheiae proaen chairousa graphonta
Haeroon te bious Birchion, aede sophon
Kai bion, eipen, hotan rhipsaes thanatoio belessi,
Sou pote grapsomenon Birchion allon echois.
Society, and other works of note.
Tae kallous dunamei ti telos; Zeus panta dedoken
Kupridi, und' autou skaeptra memaele theo.
Aek Dios estin Onap, theios pot' egrapsen Homaeros,
Alla tod' eis thnaetous Kupris epempsen onar
Zeus mounos phlogoenti poleis ekperse kerauno,
Ommasi lampra Dios Kupris oista pherei.
Carter, he said, in a letter to Cave, "I think she ought to be
celebrated in as many different languages as Louis le grand." His
admiration of her learning was so great, that when he wished to
praise the acquirements of any one excessively, he remarked that, he
knew as much Greek almost as Mrs. Carter. The verses in Elizae
Aenigma are addressed to the same excellent and accomplished lady.
It is now nearly an insult to add, that she translated Epictetus,
and contributed Nos. 44 and 100, to the Rambler. See Boswell, i.
iii. and iv. and preface to Rambler, ii.--ED.
Quis formae modus imperio? Venus arrogat audax
Omnia, nec curae sunt sua sceptra Jovi.
Ab Jove Maeonides descendere somnia narrat:
Haec veniunt Cypriae somnia missa Deae.
Jupiter unus erat, qui stravit fulmine gentes;
Nunc armant Veneris lumina tela Jovis.
Facilisque semper confitenti ades reo,
Aurem faventem precibus O! praebe meis;
Scelerum catena me laborantem grave
Aeterna tandem liberet clementia,
Ut summa laus sit, summa Christo gloria.
Per vitae tenebras rerumque incerta vagantem
Numine praesenti me tueare, pater!
Me ducat lux sancta, Deus, lux sancta sequatur;
Usque regat gressus gratia fida meos.
Sic peragam tua jussa libens, accinctus ad omne
Mandatum vivam, sic moriarque tibi.
Me, pater omnipotens, de puro respice coelo,
Quem moestum et timidum crimina dira gravant;
Da veniam pacemque mihi, da, mente serena,
Ut tibi quae placeant, omnia promptus agam.
Solvi, quo Christus cunctis delicta redemit,
Et pro me pretium, tu patiare, pater.
collects in the liturgy; the first, of that, beginning, "O God,
whose nature and property"; the second and third of the collects for
the seventeenth and twenty-first Sundays after Trinity; and the
fourth, of the first collect in the communion service.
Summe Deus, cui caeca patent penetralia cordis;
Quem nulla anxietas, nulla cupido fugit;
Quem nil vafrities peccantum subdola celat;
Omnia qui spectans, omnia ubique regis;
Mentibus afflatu terrenas ejice sordes
Divino, sanctus regnet ut intus amor:
Eloquiumque potens linguis torpentious affer,
Ut tibi laus omni semper ab ore sonet:
Sanguine quo gentes, quo secula cuncta piavit,
Haec nobis Christus promeruisse velit!
eight days before his decease.
Anni qua volucris ducitur orbita,
Patrem coelicolum perpetuo colunt
Quo vis sanguine cretae
Gentes undique carmine.
Patrem, cujus amor blandior in dies
Mortales miseros servat, alit, fovet,
Omnes undique gentes,
Sancto dicite carmine.
Musca, meae comitem, participemque dapis,
Pone metum, rostrum fidens immitte culullo,
Nam licet, et toto prolue laeta mero.
Tu, quamcunque tibi velox indulserit annus,
Carpe diem; fugit, heu, non revocanda dies!
Quae nos blanda comes, quae nos perducat eodem,
Volvitur hora mihi, volvitur hora tibi!
Una quidem, sic fata volunt, tibi vivitur aestas,
Eheu, quid decies plus mihi sexta dedit!
Olim praeteritae numeranti tempora vitae,
Sexaginta annis non minor unus erit.
Habuique, quod dedi mihi;
Sed quod reliqui, perdidi.
manuscript, to be "On the monument of John of Doncaster;" and which
are as follow:
What I gave, that I have;
What I spent, that I had;
What I left, that I lost.
Nunc, per gramina fusi,
Densa fronde salicti,
Dum defenditur imber,
Molles ducimus horas.
Hic, dum debita morti
Paulum vita moratur,
Nunc rescire priora,
Nunc instare futuris,
Nunc summi prece sancta
Patris numen adire est.
Quicquid quraeitur ultra,
Caeco ducit amore,
Vel spe ludit inani,
Luctus mox pariturum.
Angler of Isaac Walton, written by John Chalkhill, a friend of
Spenser, and a good poet in his time. They are but part of the last
stanza, which, that the reader may have it entire, is here given at
length:
If the sun's excessive heat
Make our bodies swelter,
To an osier hedge we get
For a friendly shelter!
Where in a dike,
Perch or pike,
Roach or dace,
We do chase,
Bleak or gudgeon,
Without grudging,
We are still contented.
Or we sometimes pass an hour
Under a green willow,
That defends us from a shower,
Making earth our pillow;
Where we may
Think and pray,
Before death
Stops our breath:
Other joys
Are but toys,
And to be lamented.
Speluncae late Thamesis praetendit opacae;
Marmorea trepidant qua lentae in fornice guttae,
Crystallisque latex fractus scintillat acutis;
Gemmaque, luxuriae nondum famulata nitenti
Splendit, et incoquitur tectum sine fraude metallum;
Ingredere O! rerum pura cole mente parentem;
Auriferasque auri metuens scrutare cavernas.
Ingredere! Egeriae sacrum en tibi panditur antrum!
Hic, in se totum, longe per opaca futuri
Temporis, Henricum rapuit vis vivida mentis:
Hic pia Vindamius traxit suspiria, in ipsa
Morte memor patriae; hic Marmonti pectore prima
Coelestis fido caluerunt semina flammae.
Temnere opes, pretium sceleris, patriamque tueri
Fortis, ades; tibi, sponte, patet venerabile limen.
which begin, "Thou, who shall stop where Thames' translucent wave."
Pag. 2. Brodaei edit. Bas. ann. 1549.
Non Argos pugilem, non me Messana creavit;
Patria Sparta mihi est, patria clara virum.
Arte valent isti, mihi robo revivere solo est,
Convenit ut natis, inclyta Sparta, tuis.
Br. 2.
Quandoquidem passim nulla ratione feruntur,
Cuncta cinis, cuncta et ludicra, cuncta nihil.
Br. 5.
Pectore qui duro, crudos de vite racemos,
Venturi exsecuit vascula prima meri,
Labraque constrictus, semesos, jamque terendos
Sub pedibus, populo praetereunte, jacit.
Supplicium huic, quoniam crescentia gaudia laesit,
Det Bacchus, dederat quale, Lycurge, tibi.
Hae poterant uvae laeto convivia cantu
Mulcere, aut pectus triste levare malis.
Br. 8.
Fert humeris claudum validis per compita caecus,
Hic oculos socio commodat, ille pedes.
Br. 10.
Qui, mutare vias ausus terraeque marisque,
Trajecit montes nauta, fretumque pedes,
Xerxi, tercentum Spartae Mars obstitit acris
Militibus; terris sit pelagoque pudor!
Br. 11.
Sit tibi, Calliope, Parnassum, cura, tenenti,
Alter ut adsit Homerus, adest etenim alter Achilles.
Br. 18.
Ad musas Venus haec: Veneri parete, puellae,
In vos ne missus spicula tendat amor.
Haec musae ad Venerem: sic Marti, diva, mineris,
Hue nunquam volitat debilis iste puer.
Br. 19.
Prospera sors nec te strepitoso turbine tollat,
Nec menti injiciat sordida cura jugum;
Nam vita incertis incerta impellitur auris,
Omnesque in partes tracta, retracta fluit;
Firma manet virtus; virtuti innitere, tutus
Per fluctus vitae sic tibi cursus erit.
Br. 24.
Hora bonis quasi nunc instet suprema fruaris,
Plura ut victurus secula, parce bonis:
Divitiis, utrinque cavens, qui tempore parcit,
Tempore divitiis utitur, ille sapit.
Br. 24.
Nunquam jugera messibus onusta, aut
Quos Gyges cumulos habebat auri;
Quod vitae satis est, peto, Macrine,
Mi, nequid nimis, est nimis probatum.
Br. 24.
Non opto aut precibus posco ditescere, paucis
Sit contenta mihi vita, dolore carens.
Br. 24
Recta ad pauperiem tendit, cui corpora cordi est
Multa alere, et multas aedificare domos.
Br. 24.
Tu neque dulce putes alienae accumbere mensae;
Nec probrosa avidae grata sit offa gulae;
Nec ficto fletu, fictis solvere cachinnis,
Arridens domino, collacrymansque tuo;
Laetior hand tecum, tecum neque tristior unquam,
Sed Miliae ridens, atque dolens Miliae.
Br. 26.
Nil non mortale est mortalibus; omne quod est hie
Praetereunt, aut hos praeterit omne bonum.
Br. 26.
Democrite, invisas homines majore cachinno;
Plus tibi ridendum secula nostra dabunt.
Heraclite, fluat lacrymarum crebrior imber;
Vita hominum nunc plus quod misereris habet.
Interea dubito; tecum me causa nec ulla
Ridere, aut tecum me lacrymare jubet.
Br. 26.
Elige iter vitae, ut possis: rixisque, dolisque,
Perstrepit omne forum; cura molesta domi est;
Rura labor lassat; mare mille pericula terrent;
Verte solum, fient causa timoris opes;
Paupertas misera est; multae, cum conjuge, lites
Tecta ineunt; coelebs omnia solus ages.
Proles aucta gravat, rapta orbat; caeca juventae est
Virtus; canities cauta vigore caret.
Ergo optent homines, aut nunquam in luminis oras
Venisse, aut visa luce repente mori.
Elige iter vitae, ut mavis: prudenua, lausque,
Permeat omne forum; vita quieta domi est;
Rus ornat natura; levat maris aspera lucrum,
Verte solum, donat plena crumena decus;
Pauperies latitat; cum conjuge, gaudia multa
Tecta ineunt; coelebs impediere minus;
Mulcet amor prolis, sopor est sine prole profundus;
Praecellit juvenis vi, pietate senex.
Nemo optet, nunquam venisse in luminis oras,
Aut periisse; scatet vita benigna bonis.
Br. 27.
Vita omnis scena est ludusque: aut ludere disce
Seria seponens, aut mala dura pati.
Br. 27.
Quae, sine morte, fuga est vitae, quam turba malorum
Non vitanda gravem, non toleranda facit?
Dulcia dat natura quidem, mare, sidera, terras,
Lunaque quas, et sol, itque reditque vias.
Terror inest aliis, moerorque, et siquid habebis,
Forte, boni, ultrices experiere vices.
Br. 27.
Terram adii nudus, de terra nudus abibo.
Quid labor efficiet? non, nisi nudus, ero.
Br. 27.
Natus eram lacrymans, lacrymans e luce recedo:
Sunt quibus a lacrymis vix vacat ulla dies.
Tale hominum genus est, infirmum, triste, misellum,
Quod mors in cineres solvit, et abdit humo.
Br. 29.
Quisquis adit lectos, elata uxore, secundos,
Naufragus iratas ille retentat aquas.
Br. 30.
Foelix ante alios nullius debitor aeris;
Hunc sequitur coelebs; tertius, orbe, venis.
Nee male res cessit, subito si funere sponsam,
Didatus magna dote, recondis humo.
His sapiens lectis, Epicurum quaerere frustra
Quales sint monades, qua fit inane, sinas.
Br. 31.
Optarit quicunque senex sibi longius aevum,
Dignus, qui multa in lustra senescat, erit.
Cum procul est, optat, cum venit, quisque senectam,
Incusat, semper spe meliora videt.
Br. 46.
Omnis vita nimis brevis est felicibus, una
Nox miseris longi temporis instar habet.
Br. 55.
Gratia ter grata est velox, sin forte moretur,
Gratia vix restat nomine digna suo.
Br. 56.
Seu prece poscatur, seu non, da, Jupiter, omne,
Magne, bonum; omne malum, et poscentibus, abnue nobis.
Br. 60.
Me, cane vitato, canis excipit alter; eodem
In me animo tellus gignit et unda feras,
Nec mirum; restat lepori conscendere coelum,
Sidereus tamen hie territat, ecce canis!
Br. 70.
Telluri arboribus ver frondens, sidera coelo,
Graeciae et urbs, urbi est ista propago, decus.
Br. 75.
Impia facta patrans, homines fortasse latebis,
Non poteris, meditans prava, latere deos.
Br. 75.
Antiope satyrum, Danae aurum, Europa juvencum,
Et cycnum fecit Leda petita, Jovem.
Br. 92.
Aevi sat novi quam sim brevis; astra tuenti,
Per certas; stabili lege, voluta vices,
Tangitur haud pedibus tellus: conviva deorum
Expleor ambrosiis, exhilarorque cibis.
Br. 96.
Quod nimium est sit ineptum, hinc, ut dixere priores,
Et melli nimio fellis amaror inest.
Br. 103.
Puppe gubernatrix sedisti, audacia, prima
Divitiis acuens aspera corda virum;
Sola rates struis infidas, et dulcis amorem
Lucri ulciscendum mox nece sola doces.
Aurea secla hominum, quorum spectandus ocellis
E longinquo itidem pontus et orcus erat.
Br. 126.
Ditescis, credo, quid restat? quicquid habebis
In tumulum tecum, morte jubente, trahes?
Divitias cumulas, pereuntes negligis horas;
Incrementa aevi non cumulare potes.
Br. 120.
Mater adulantum, prolesque, pecunia, curae,
Teque frui timer est, teque carere dolor.
Br. 126.
Me miserum sors omnis habet; florentibus annis,
Pauper eram, nummis diffluit area senis;
Queis uti poteram quondam, fortuna negavit,
Queis uti nequeo, nunc mihi praebet, opes.
Br. 127.
Mnemosyne, ut Sappho, mellita voce, canentem
Audiit, irata est, ne nova musa foret.
Br. 152.
Cum tacet indoctus, sapientior esse videtur,
Et morbus tegitur, dum premit ora pudor.
Br. 155.
Nunc huic, nunc aliis cedens, cui farra Menippus
Credit, Achaemenidae nuper agellus eram.
Quod nulli proprium versat fortuna, putabat
Ille suum stolidus, nunc putat ille suum.
Br. 156.
Non fortuna sibi te gratum tollit in altum;
At docet, exemplo, vis sibi quanta, tuo.
Br. 162.
Hic, aurum ut reperit, laqueum abjicit; alter ut aurum
Non reperit, nectit quem reperit, laqueum.
Br. 167.
Vive tuo ex ammo: vario rumore loquetur
De te plebs audax, hic bene, et ille male.
Br. 168.
Vitae rosa brevis est; properans si carpere nolis,
Quaerenti obveniet mox sine flore rubus.
Br. 170.
Pulicibus morsus, restincta lampade, stultus
Exclamat: nunc me cernere desinitis.
Br. 202,
Mendotum pinxit Diodorus, et exit imago,
Praeter Menodotura, nullius absimilis.
Br. 205.
Haud lavit Phido, haud tetigit, mihi febre calenti
In mentem ut venit nominis, interii.
Br. 210.
Nycticorax cantat lethale; sed ipsa, canenti
Demophilo auscultans, Nycticorax moritur.
Br. 212.
Hermem deorum nuncium, pennis levem,
Quo rege gaudent Arcades, furem boum,
Hujus palestrae qui vigil custos stetit,
Clam nocte tollit Aulus, et ridens ait:
Praestat magistro saepe discipulus suo.
Br. 223.
Qui jacet hic servus vixit: nunc, lumine cassus,
Dario magno non minus ille potest.
Br. 227.
Funus Alexandri mentitur fama; fidesque
Si Phoebo, victor nescit obire diem.
Br. 241.
Nauta, quis hoc jaceat, ne percontere, sepulchro,
Eveniat tantum mitior unda tibi!
Br. 256.
Cur opulentus eges? tua cuncta in foenore ponis:
Sic aliis dives, tu tibi pauper agis.
Br. 262.
Qui pascis barbam, si crescis mente, Platoni,
Hirce, parem nitido te tua barba facit.
Br. 266.
Clarus Ioannes, reginae affinis, ab alto
Sanguine Anastasii; cuncta sepulta jacent:
Et pius, et recti cultor: non illa jacere
Dicam; stat virtus non subigenda neci.
Br. 267.
Cunctiparens tellus, salve, levis esto pusillo
Lysigeni, fuerat non gravis ille tibi.
Br. 285.
Naufragus hic jaceo; contra, jacet ecce colonus!
Idem orcus terras, sic, pelagoque subest.
Br. 301.
Quid salvere jubes me, pessime? Corripe gressus;
Est mihi quod non te rideo, plena salus.
Br. 304.
Et ferus est Timon sub terris; janitor orci,
Cerbere, te morsu ne petat ille, cave.
Br. 307.
Vitam a terdecimo sextus mihi finiet annus,
Astra mathematicos si modo vera docent.
Sufficit hoc votis, flos hic pulcherrimus aevi est,
Et senium triplex Nestoris urna capit.
Br. 322.
Zosima, quae solo fuit olim corpore serva,
Corpore nunc etiam libera facta fuit.
Br. 326.
Exiguum en! Priami monumentum; hand ille meretur
Quale, sed hostiles, quale dedere manus.
Br. 326.
Hector dat gladium Ajaci, dat balteum et Ajax
Hectori, et exitio munus utrique fuit.
Br. 344.
Ut vis, ponte minax, modo tres discesseris ulnas
Ingemina fluctus, ingeminaque sonum.
Br. 344.
Naufragus hic jaceo, fidens tamen utere velis;
Tutum aliis aequor, me pereunte, fuit.
Br. 398.
Heraclitus ego; indoctae ne laedite liuguae
Subtile ingenium, quaero, capaxque mei;
Unus homo mihi pro soxcentis, turba popelli
Pro nullo, clamo nunc tumulatus idem.
Br. 399.
Ambraciota, vale lux alma, Cleombrotus infit,
Et saltu e muro ditis opaca petit:
Triste nihil passus, animi at de sorte Platonis
Scripta legens, sola vivere mente cupit.
Br. 399.
Servus, Epictetus, mutilato corpore, vixi,
Pauperieque Irus, curaque summa deum.
Br. 445.
Unde hic Praxiteles? nudam vidistis, Adoni,
Et Pari, et Anchisa, non alius, Venerem.
Br. 451.
Sufflato accendis quisquis carbone lucernam,
Corde meo accendens; ardeo totus ego.
Br. 486.
Jupiter hoc templum, ut, siquando relinquit Olympum,
Atthide non alius desit Olympus, habet.
Br. 487.
Civis et externus grati; domus hospita nescit
Quaerere, quis, cujus, quis pater, unde venis.
Br. 487.
Cum fugere haud possit, fractis victoria pennis
Te manet, imperii, Roma, perenne decus.
Br. 488.
Latrones, alibi locupletum quaerite tecta,
Assidet huic, custos, strenua pauperies.
Fortunae malim adversae tolerare procellas;
Quam domini ingentis ferre supercilium.
En, Sexto, Sexti meditatur imago, silente;
Orator statua est, statuaeque orator imago.
Pulchra est virgiuitas intacta, at vita periret,
Omnes si vellent virginitate frui;
Nequitiam fugiens, servata contrahe lege
Conjugium, ut pro te des hominem patriae.
Fert humeris, venerabile onus, Cythereius heros
Per Trojae flammas, densaque tela, patrem:
Clamat et Argivis, vetuli, ne tangite; vita
Exiguum est Marti, sed mihi grande, lucrum.
Forma animos hominum capit, at, si gratia desit,
Non tenet; esca natat pulchra, sed hamus abest,
Cogitat aut loquitur nil vir, nil cogitat uxor,
Felici thalamo non, puto, rixa strepit.
Buccina disjecit Thebarum moenia, struxit
Quae lyra, quam sibi non concinit harmonia!
Mente senes olim juvenis, Faustine, premebas,
Nunc juvenum terres robore corda senex.
Laevum at utrumque decus, juveni quod praebuit olim
Turba senum, juvenes nunc tribuere seni.
Exceptae hospitio, musae tribuere libellos
Herodoto, hospitii praemia, quaeque suum.
Stella mea, observans stellas, dii me aethera faxint
Multis ut te oculis sim potis aspicere.
Clara Cheroneae soboles, Plutarche, dicavit
Hanc statuam ingenio, Roma benigna, tuo.
Das bene collatos, quos Roma et Graecia jactat,
Ad divos, paribus passibus, ire duces;
Sed similem, Plutarche, tuae describere vitam
Non poteras, regio non tulit ulla parem.
Dat tibi Pythagoram pictor; quod ni ipse tacere
Pythagoras mallet, vocem habuisset opus.
Prolem Hippi, et sua qua meliorem secula nullum
Videre, Archidicen, haec tumulavit humus;
Quam, regum sobolem, nuptam, matrem, atque sororem
Fecerunt nulli sors titulique gravem.
Cecropidis gravis hic ponor, Martique dicatus,
Quo tua signantur gesta, Philippe, lapis.
Spreta jacet Marathon, jacet et Salaminia laurus,
Omnia dum Macedum gloria et arma premunt.
Sint Demosthenica ut jurata cadavera voce,
Stabo illis qui sunt, quique fuere, gravis.
Floribus in pratis, legi quos ipse, coronam
Contextam variis, do, Rhodoclea, tibi:
Hic anemone humet, confert narcissus odores
Cum violis; spirant lilia mista rosis.
His redimita comas, mores depone superbos,
Haec peritura nitent; tu peritura nites!
Murem Asclepiades sub tecto ut vidit avarus,
Quid tibi, mus, mecum, dixit, amice, tibi?
Mus blandum ridens, respondit, pelle timorem:
Hic, bone vir, sedem, nori alimenta, peto.
Saepe tuum in tumulum lacrymarum decidit imber,
Quem fundit blando junctus amore dolor;
Charus enim cunctis, tanquam, dum vita manebat,
Cuique esses natus, cuique sodalis, eras.
Heu quam dura preces sprevit, quam surda querelas
Parca, juventutem non miserata tuam!
Arti ignis lucem tribui, tamen artis et ignis
Nunc ope, supplicii vivit imago mei.
Gratia nulla hominum mentes tenet, ista Promethei
Munera muneribus, si retulere fabri.
Illa triumphatrix Graium consueta procorum
Ante suas agmen Lais habere fores,
Hoc Veneri speculum; nolo me cernere qualis
Sum nunc, nec possum cernere qualis eram.
Crethida fabellas dulces garrire peritam
Prosequitur lacrymis filia moesta Sami:
Blandam lanifici sociam sine fine loquacem,
Quam tenet hic, cunctas quae manet, alta quies.
Dicite, Causidici, gelido nunc marmore magni
Mugitum tumulus comprimit Amphiloci.
Si forsan tumulum quo conditur Eumarus aufers,
Nil lucri facies; ossa habet et cinerem.
Me, rex deorum, tuque, due, necessitas,
Quo, lege vestra, vita me feret mea.
Sequar libenter, sin reluctari velim,
Fiam scelestus, nec tamen minus sequar.
Poeta, lector, hic quiescit Hipponax,
Si sis scelestus, praeteri, procul, marmor:
At te bonum si noris, et bonis natum,
Tutum hic sedile, et si placet, sopor tutus.
Non immerito culpanda venit
Proavum vecors insipientia,
Qui convivia, lautasque dapes,
Hilarare suis jussere modis
Cantum, vitae dulce levamen.
At nemo feras iras hominum
Domibus claris exitiales,
Voce aut fidibus pellere docuit;
Queis tamen aptam ferre medelam
Utile cunctis hoc opus esset;
Namque, ubi mensas onerant epulae,
Quorsum dulcis luxuria soni?
Sat laetitia sine subsidiis,
Pectora molli mulcet dubiae
Copia coenae.
Tois Araes brotoloighos enhi ptolemoisi memaene,
Kahi toios Paphiaen plaesen eroti thean.
The above is a version of a Latin epigram on the famous John duke of
Marlborough, by the abbe Salvini, which is as follows:
Haud alio vultu fremuit Mars acer in armis:
Haud alio Cypriam percutit ore deam.
The duke was, it seems, remarkably handsome in his person, to which the
second line has reference.
Prima parit terras aetas; siccatque secunda;
Evocat Abramum dein tertia; quarta relinquit
Aegyptum; templo Solomonis quinta supersit;
Cyrum sexta timet; laetatur septima Christo.
Myrias adsciscit sibi nonagesima septem
Undecies binas decadas et millia septem
Myriadas decies septem numerare jubebit
Pastor Arabs: decies octo sibi Persa requirit.
Myriades sibi pulchra duas, duo millia poscit
Ut dicas, spatiis quam latis imperet orbi
Cum sexagenis, dum plura recluserit aetas,
Vult sibi vicenas millesima myrias addi,
Se quinquagenis octingentesima jungit
Et quadragenis quoque ter tria millia jungit.
Myriadas denas dat, quinque et millia, sexque
Ter tria myriadi conjungit millia quartae,
Millia myriadi septem foecunda secundae
Quingentis quadragenis socialis adauget
Ter sex centurias Hollandia jactat opima.
Undecimum Camber vult septem millibus addi.
only offered as a fragment,) in the doctor's manuscript, are
prefixed the words "Geographia Metrica." As we are referred, in the
first of the verses, to Templeman, for having furnished the
numerical computations that are the subject of them, his work has
been, accordingly, consulted, the title of which is, a new Survey of
the Globe; and which professes to give an accurate mensuration of
all the empires, kingdoms, and other divisions thereof, in the
square miles that they respectively contain. On comparison of the
several numbers in these verses, with those set down by Templeman,
it appears that nearly half of them are precisely the same; the rest
are not quite so exactly done.--For the convenience of the reader,
it has been thought right to subjoin each number, as it stands in
Templeman's works, to that in Dr. Johnson's verses which refers to
it.
conformity in Dr. Johnson's number to Templeman's; who sets down the
square miles of Palestine at 7,600.
square miles.
Johnson's verses are alike.--We find, accordingly, the Morea, in
Templeman, to be set down at 7,220 square miles.--Arabia, at
Johnson appears to have rendered into Latin verse, we find the
numbers exactly agreeing with those of Templeman, who makes the
square miles of the United Provinces, 9540--of the province of
Holland, 1800--and of Wales, 7011.
Quos laudat vates, Graecus, Romanus, et Anglus,
Tres tria temporibus secla dedere suis.
Sublime ingenium Graecus; Romanus habebat
Carmen grande sonans; Anglus utrumque tulit.
Nil majus natura capit: clarare priores
Quae potuere duos tertius unus habet.
Quae fausta Romae dixit Horatius,
Haec fausta vobis dicimus, Angliae
Opes, triumphos, et subacti
Imperium pelagi precantes.
Such strains as, mingled with the lyre,
Could Rome with future greatness fire,
Ye sons of England, deign to hear,
Nor think our wishes less sincere.
May ye the varied blessings share
Of plenteous peace and prosp'rous war;
And o'er the globe extend your reign,
Unbounded masters of the main!
Inclytus hic haeres magni requiescit Oeni,
Confessas tantum mente, manuque, patrem;
Servilem tuti cultum contempsit agelli,
Et petiit terras, per freta longa, novas.
The following incomparable tale was published in 1759; and the
early familiarity with eastern manners, which Johnson derived
from his translation of father Lobo's travels into Abissinia, may
be presumed to have led him to fix his opening scene in that
country; while Rassela Christos, the general of sultan Sequed,
mentioned in that work, may have suggested the name of his
speculative prince. Rasselas was written in the evenings of a
single week, and sent to the press, in portions, with the amiable
view of defraying the funeral expenses of the author's aged
mother, and discharging her few remaining debts. The sum,
however, which he received for it, does not seem large, to those
who know its subsequent popularity. None of his works has
been more widely circulated; and the admiration, which it has
attracted, in almost every country of Europe, proves, that, with
all its depression and sadness, it does utter a voice, that meets
with an assenting answer in the hearts of all who have tried life,
and found its emptiness. Johnson's view of our lot on earth was
always gloomy, and the circumstances, under which Rasselas was
composed, were calculated to add a deepened tinge of melancholy
to its speculations on human folly, misery, or malignity. Many
of the subjects discussed, are known to have been those which
had agitated Johnson's mind. Among them is the question,
whether the departed ever revisit the places that knew them
on earth, and how far they may take an interest in the welfare
of those, over whom they watched, when here. We shall elsewhere
have to contemplate the moralist, standing on the border
of his mother's grave, and asking, with anxious agony, whether
that dark bourn, once passed, terminated for ever the cares of
not, or acknowledge not, that there are secrets, in both matter
and mind, of which their philosophy has not dreamed, may smile
at what they may, in their derision, term such weak and idle
inquiries. But on them, the most powerful minds that ever
illuminated this world, have fastened, with an intense curiosity;
and, owning their fears, or their ignorance, have not dared to
It is not to be denied, that Rasselas displays life, as one unvaried
series of disappointments, and leaves the mind, at its
close, in painful depression. This effect has been considered an